UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 1

Chapter 4 - A Modern, Thriving
Society

Chapter contents
• The UK today
• Religion
• Customs and traditions
• Sport
• Arts and culture
• Leisure
• Places of interest

The UK today
The UK today is a more diverse society than it was 100 years ago, in both
ethnic and religious terms. Post-war immigration means that nearly 10% of
the population has a parent or grandparent born outside the UK. The UK
continues to be a multinational and multiracial society with a rich and varied
culture. This section will tell you about the different parts of the UK and
some of the important places. It will also explain some of the UK’s traditions
and customs and some of the popular activities that take place.

The nations of the UK
The UK is located in the north west of Europe. The longest distance on the
mainland is from John O’Groats on the north coast of Scotland to Land’s End
in the south-west corner of England. It is about 870 miles (approximately
1,400 kilometres).
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 3

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 5

Population growth has been faster in more recent years. Migration into the
UK and longer life expectancy have played a part in population growth.
The population is very unequally distributed over the four parts of the UK.
England more or less consistently makes up 84% of the total population,
Wales around 5%, Scotland just over 8%, and Northern Ireland less than
3%.
An ageing population
People in the UK are living longer than ever before. This is due to improved
living standards and better health care. There are now a record number of
people aged 85 and over. This has an impact on the cost of pensions and
health care.

Ethnic diversity
The UK population is ethnically diverse and changing rapidly, especially in
large cities such as London. It is not always easy to get an exact picture of
the ethnic origin of all the population.
There are people in the UK with ethnic origins from all over the world. In
surveys, the most common ethnic description chosen is white, which includes
people of European, Australian, Canadian, New Zealand and American
descent. Other significant groups are those of Asian, black and mixed
descent.

An equal society
Within the UK, it is a legal requirement that men and women should not be
discriminated against because of their gender or because the are, or are not,
married. They have equal rights to work, own property, marry and divorce.
If they are married, both parents are equally responsible for their children.
Women in Britain today make up about half of the workforce. On average,
girls leave school with better qualifications than boys. More women than
men study at university.
Employment opportunities for women are much greater than they were in the
past. Women work in all sectors of the economy, and there are now more
women in high-level positions than ever before, including senior mangers in
traditionally male-dominated occupations. Alongside this, men now work in
more varied jobs than they did in the past.
It is no longer expected that women should stay at home and not work.
Women often continue to work after having children. In many families today,
both partners work and both share responsibility for childcare and household
chores.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 6

Check that you understand
• The capital cites of the UK
• What languages other than English are spoken in particular parts of the
UK
• How the population of the UK has changed
• That the UK is and equal society and ethnically diverse
• The currency of the UK

Religion
The UK is historically a Christian country. In the 2009 Citizenship Survey,
70% of people identified themselves as Christian. Much smaller proportions
identified themselves as Muslim (4%), Hindu (2%), Sikh (1%), Jewish or
Buddhist (both less than 0.5%), and 2% of people followed another religion.
There are religious buildings for other religions all over the UK. This includes
Islamic mosques, Hindu temples, Jewish synagogues, Sikh gurdwaras and
Buddhist temples. However, everyone has the legal right to choose their
religion, or to choose not to practise a religion. In the Citizenship Survey,
21% of people said that they had no religion.

Christian churches
In England, there is a constitutional link between Church and state. The
official Church of the state is the Church of England (called the Anglican
Church in other countries and the Episcopal Church in Scotland and the
United States). It is a Protestant Church and has existed since the
Reformation in the 1530s.
The monarch is the head of the Church of England. The spiritual leader of
the Church of England is the Archbishop of Canterbury. The monarch has the
right to select the Archbishop and other senior church officials, but usually
the choice is made by the Prime Minister and a committee appointed by the
Church. Several Church of England bishops sit in the House of Lords.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 7

In Scotland, the national Church is the Church of Scotland, which is a
Presbyterian Church. It is governed by ministers and elders. The
chairperson of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland is the
Moderator, who is appointed for one year only and often speaks on behalf of
that Church.
There is no established Church in Wales or Northern Ireland.
Other Protestant Christian groups in the UK are Baptists, Methodists,
Presbyterians and Quakers. There are also other denominations of
Christianity, the biggest of which is Roman Catholic.

Patron saints’ days
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland each have a national saint,
called a patron saint. Each saint has a special day:
• 1 March: St David’s Day, Wales
• 17 March: St Patrick’s Day, Northern Ireland
• 23 April: St George’s Day, England
• 30 November: St Andrew’s Day, Scotland.
Only Scotland and Northern Ireland have their patron saint’s day as an
official holiday (although in Scotland not all businesses and offices will close).
Events are held across Scotland, Northern Ireland and the rest of the
country, especially where there are a lot of people of Scottish, Northern Irish
and Irish heritage.
While the patron saints’ days are no longer public holidays in England and
Wales, they are still celebrated. Parades and small festivals are held all over
the two countries.
Check that you understand
•
•

The different religions that are practised in the UK
That the Anglican Church, also known as the Church of England, is the
Church of the state in England (the ‘established Church’)
• That other branches of the Christian Church also practise their faith in the
UK without being linked to the state
• That other religions are practised in the UK
• About the patron saints

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 8

Westminster Abbey has been the coronation church since 1066 and is the final resting place of
17 monarchs

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 9

Customs and traditions
The main Christian festivals
Christmas Day, 25 December, celebrates the birth of Jesus Christ. It is a
public holiday.
Many Christians go to church on Christmas Eve (24
December) or on Christmas Day itself.
Christmas is celebrated in a traditional way. People usually spend the day at
home and eat a special meal, which often includes roast turkey, Christmas
pudding and mince pies. They give gifts, send cards and decorate their
houses. Christmas is a special time for children. Very young children believe
that Father Christmas (also known as Santa Claus) brings them presents
during the night before Christmas Day. Many people decorate a tree in their
home.

A typical Christmas Day meal

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 10

Boxing Day is the day after Christmas Day and is a public holiday.
Easter takes place in March or April. It marks the death of Jesus Christ on
Good Friday and his rising from the dead on Easter Sunday. Both Good
Friday and the following Monday, called Easter Monday, are public holidays.
The 40 days before Easter are known as Lent. It is a time when Christians
take time to reflect and prepare for Easter. Traditionally, people would fast
during this period and today many people will give something up, like a
favourite food. The day before Lent starts is called Shrove Tuesday, or
Pancake Day. People eat pancakes, which were traditionally made to use up
foods such as eggs, fat and milk before fasting. Lent begins on Ash
Wednesday. There are church services where Christians are marked with an
ash cross on their forehead as a symbol of death and sorrow for sin.
Easter is also celebrated by people who are not religious. ‘Easter eggs’ are
chocolate eggs given as presents as a symbol of new life.

Other religious festivals
Diwali normally falls in October or November and lasts for five days. It is
often called the Festival of Lights. It is celebrated by Hindus and Sikhs. It
celebrates the victory of good over evil and the gaining of knowledge. There
are different stories about how the festival came about. There is a famous
celebration of Diwali in Leicester.

Diwali is popularly known as the Festival of Lights

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 11

Hannukah is in November or December and is celebrated for eight days. It
is to remember the Jews’ struggle for religious freedom. On each day of the
festival a candle is lit on a stand of eight candles (called a menorah) to
remember the story of the festival, where oil that should have lasted only a
day did so for eight.
Eid a-Fitr celebrates the end of Ramadan, when Muslims have fasted for a
month. They thank Allah for giving them the strength to complete the fast.
The date when it takes place changes every year. Muslims attend special
services and meals.
Eid ul Adha remembers that the prophet Ibrahim was willing to sacrifice his
son when God ordered him to . It reminds Muslims of their own commitment
to God. Many Muslims sacrifice an animal to eat during this festival. In
Britain this has to be done in a slaughterhouse.
Vaisakhi (also spelled Baisakhi) is a Sikh festival which celebrates the
founding of the Sikh community known as the Khalsa. It is celebrated on 14
April each year with parades, dancing and singing.

Other festivals and traditions
New Year, 1 January, is a public holiday. People usually celebrate on the
night of 31 December (called New Year’s Eve). In Scotland, 31 December is
called Hogmanay and 2 January is also a public holiday. For some Scottish
people, Hogmanay is a bigger holiday than Christmas.
Valentine’s Day, 14 February, is when lovers exchange cards and gifts.
Sometimes people send anonymous cards to someone they secretly admire.
April Fool’s Day, 1 April, is a day when people play jokes on each other
until midday. The television and newspapers often have stories that are April
Fool jokes.
Mothering Sunday (or Mother’s day) is the Sunday three weeks before
Easter. Children send cards or buy gifts for their mothers.
Father’s Day is the third Sunday in June. Children send cards or buy gifts
for their fathers.
Halloween, 31 October, is an ancient festival and has roots in the pagan
festival to mark the beginning of winter. Young people will often dress up in
frightening costumes to play ‘trick or treat’. People give them treats to stop
them playing tricks on them. A lot of people carve lanterns out of pumpkins
and put a candle inside of them.
Bonfire Night, 5 November, is an occasion when people in Great Britain set
off fireworks at home or in special displays. The origin of this celebration
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 12

was an event in 1605, when a group of Catholics led by Guy Fawkes failed in
their plan to kill the Protestant king with a bomb in the Houses of Parliament.
Remembrance Day, 11 November, commemorates those who died fighting
for the UK and its allies. Originally it commemorated the dead of the First
World War, which ended on 11 November 1918. People wear poppies (the
red flower found on the battlefields of the First World War). At 11.00 am
there is a two-minute silence and wreaths are laid at the Cenotaph in
Whitehall, London.

Unveiled in 1920, the Cenotaph is the Centrepiece to the Remembrance Day service

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 13

Bank holidays
As well as those mentioned previously, there are other public holidays each
year called bank holidays, when banks and many other businesses are closed
for the day. These are of no religious significance. They are at the beginning
of May in late May or early June, and in August. In Northern Ireland, the
anniversary of the Battle of the Boyne in July is also a public holiday.

Check that you understand
• The main Christian festivals that are celebrated in the UK
• Other religious festivals that are important in the UK
• Some of the other events that are celebrated in the UK
• What a bank holiday is

Sport
Sports of all kinds play an important part in many people’s lives. There are
several sports that are particularly popular in the UK. Many sporting events
take place at major stadiums such as Wembley Stadium in London and the
Millennium Stadium in Cardiff.
Local governments and private companies provide sports facilities such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, football pitches, dry ski slopes and
gymnasiums. Many famous sports, including cricket, football, lawn tennis,
golf and rugby, began in Britain.
The UK has hosted the Olympic games on three occasions: 1908, 1948 and
2012. The main Olympic site for the 2012 Games was in Stratford, East
London. The British team was very successful, across a wide range of
Olympic sports, finishing third in the medal table.
The Paralympic Games for 2012 were also hosted in London.
The
Paralympics have their origin in the work of Dr Sir Ludwig Guttman, a
German refugee, at the Stoke Mandeville hospital in Buckinghamshire. Dr
Guttman developed new methods of treatment for people with spinal injuries
and encouraged patients to take part in exercise and sport.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 14

Notable British sportsmen and women
Sir Roger Bannister (1929-) was the first man in the world to run a mile in
under four minutes, in 1954.
Sir Jackie Stewart (1939-) is a Scottish former racing driver who won the
Formula 1 world championship three times.
Bobby Moore (1941-93) captained the English football team that won the
World Cup in 1966.
Sir Ian Botham (1955-) captained the English cricket team and holds a
number of English Test cricket records, both for batting and for bowling.
Jayne Torvill (1957_) and Christopher Dean (1958-) won gold medals
for ice dancing at the Olympic Games in 1984 and is one of Britain’s greatest
Olympians.
Sir Steve Redgrave (1962-) won gold medals in rowing in five consecutive
Olympic Games and is one of Britain’s greatest Olympians.
Baroness Tanni Grey-Thompson (1969-) is an athlete who uses a
wheelchair and won 16 Paralympic medals, including 11 gold medals, in races
over five Paralympic Games. She won the London Marathon six times and
broke a total of 30 world records.
Dame Kelly Holmes (1970_) won two gold medals for running in the 2004
Olympic Games. She has held a number of British and European records.
Dame Ellen MacArthur (1976-) is a yachtswoman and in 2004 became the
fastest person to sail around the world singlehanded.
Sir Chris Hoy (1976-) is a Scottish cyclist who has won six gold and one
silver Olympic medals. He has also won 11 world championship titles.
David Weir (1979-) is a Paralympian who uses a wheelchair and has won
six gold medals over two Paralympic Games. He has also won the London
Marathon six times.
Bradley Wiggins (1980-) is a cyclist. In 2012, he became the first Briton
to win the Tour de France. He has won seven Olympic Medals, including gold
medals in the 2004, 2008 and 2012 Olympic Games.
Mo Farah (1983-) is a British distance runner, born in Somalia. He won
gold medals in the 2012 Olympics for the 5,000 and 10,000 metres and is
the first Briton to win the Olympic gold medal in the 10,000 metres.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 15

Jessica Ennis (1986-) is an athlete. She won the 2012 Olympic gold medal
in the heptathlon, which includes seven different track and field events. She
also holds a number of British athletics records.
Andy Murray (1987-) is a Scottish tennis player who in 2012 won the
men’s singles in the US Open. He is the first British man to win a singles title
in a Grand Slam tournament since 1936. In the same year, he won Olympic
gold and silver medals and was runner-up in the men’s singles at Wimbledon
(see page 89).
Ellie Simmonds (1994-) is a Paralympian who won gold medals for
swimming at the 2008 and 2012 Paralympic Games and holds a number of
world records. She was the youngest member of the British team at the
2008 Games.

Cricket
Cricket originated in England and is now played in many countries. Games
can last up to five days but still result in a draw! The idiosyncratic nature of
the game and its complex laws are said to reflect the best of the British
character and sense of fair play. You may come across expressions such as
‘rain stopped play’, ‘batting on a sticky wicket’, ‘playing a straight bat’,
‘bowled a googly’ or ‘it’s just not cricket’, which have passed into everyday
usage. The most famous competition is the Ashes, which is a series of Test
matches played between England and Australia.

Football
Football is the UK’s most popular sport. It has a long history in the UK and
the first professional football clubs were formed in the late 19th century.
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland each have separate leagues
in which clubs representing different towns and cities compete. The English
Premier League attracts a huge international audience. Many UK teams also
compete in competitions such as the UEFA (Union of European Football
Associations) Champions League, against other teams from Europe. Most
towns and cities have a professional club and people take great pride in
supporting their home team. There can be great pride in supporting their
home team. There can be great rivalry between different football clubs and
among fans.
Each country in the UK also has its own national team that competes with
other national teams across the world in tournaments such as the FIFA
(Fédération Internationale de Football Association) World Cup and UEFA
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 16

European Football Championships. England’s only international tournament
victory was at the World Cup of 1966, hosted in the UK.
Football is also a popular sport to play in many local communities, with
people playing amateur games every week in parks all over the UK.

Rugby
Rugby originated in England in the early 19th century and is very popular in
the UK today. There are two different types of rugby, which have different
rules: union and league. Both have separate leagues and national teams in
England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland (who play with the Irish
Republic). Teams from all countries compete in a range of competitions. The
most famous rugby union competition is the Six Nations Championship
between England, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, France and Italy. The Super
League is the most well-known rugby league (club) competition.

Horse racing
There is a very long history of horse racing in Britain, with evidence of events
taking place as far back as Roman times. The sport has a long association
with royalty. There are racecourses all over the UK. Famous horse-racing
events include: Royal Ascot, a five-day race meeting in Berkshire attended
by members of the Royal Family; the Grand National at Aintree near
Liverpool; and the Scottish Grand National at Ayr. There is a National
Horseracing Museum in Newmarket, Suffolk.

Golf
The modern game of golf can be traced back to 15th century Scotland. It is a
popular sport played socially as well as professionally. There are public and
private golf courses all over the UK. St Andrews in Scotland is known as the
home of golf.
The open championship is the only ‘Major’ tournament held outside the
United States. It is hosted by a different golf course every year.

Tennis
Modern tennis evolved in England in the late 19th century. The first tennis
club was founded in Leamington Spa in 1872. The most famous tournament
hosted in Britain is The Wimbledon Championships, which takes place each
year at the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club.
It is the oldest
tennis tournament in the world and the only ‘Grand Slam’ event played on
grass.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 17

Water sports
Sailing continues to be popular in the UK, reflecting our maritime heritage. A
British sailor, Sir Francis Chichester, was the first person to sail singlehanded around the world, in 1966/67. Two years later, Sir Robin KnoxJohnston became the first person to do this without stopping. Many sailing
events are held throughout the UK, the most famous of which is at Cowes on
the Isle of Wight.
Rowing is also popular, both as a leisure activity and as a competitive sport.
There is a popular yearly race on the Thames between Oxford and Cambridge
Universities.

Motor sports
There is a long history of motor sport in the UK, for both cars and motor
cycles. Motor-car racing in the UK started in 1902. The UK continues to be a
world leader in the development and manufacture of motor-sport technology.
A Formula 1 Grand Prix event is held in the UK each year and a number of
British Grand Prix drivers have won the Formula 1 World Championship.
Recent British winners include Damon Hill, Lewis Hamilton and Jenson
Button.

Skiing
Skiing is increasingly popular in the UK. Many people go abroad to ski and
there are also dry slopes throughout the UK. Skiing on snow may also be
possible during the winter. There are five ski centres in Scotland, as well as
Europe’s longest dry ski slope near Edinburgh.

Arts and culture
Music
Music is an important part of British culture, with a rich and varied heritage.
It ranges from classical music to modern pop. There are many different
venues and musical events that take place across the UK.
The Proms is an eight-week summer season of orchestral classical music that
takes place in various venues, including the Royal Albert Hall in London. It
has been in various venues, including the Royal Albert Hall in London. It has
been organised by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) since 1927.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 18

The Last Night of the Proms is the most well-known concert and (along with
others in the series) is broadcast on television.
Classical music has been popular in the UK for centuries. Henry Purcell
(1659-95) was the organist at Westminster Abbey. He wrote church music,
operas and other pieces, and developed a British style distinct from that
elsewhere in Europe. He continues to be influential on British composers.
The German-born composer George Frederick Handel (1685-1759) spent
many years in the UK and became a British citizen in 1727. He wrote the
Water Music for King George I and Music for the Royal Fireworks for his son,
George II.
Both these pieces continue to be very popular. Handel also
wrote an oratorio, Messiah, which is sung regularly by choirs, often at Easter
time.
More recently, important composers include Gustav Holst (1874-1934),
whose work includes The Planets, a suite of pieces themed around the
planets and the solar system. He adapted Jupiter, part of the Planets suite,
as the tune for I owe to thee my country, a popular hymn in British churches.
Sir Edward Elgar (1857-1934) was born in Worcester, England. His bestknown work is probably the Pomp and Circumstance Marches. March No1
(Land of Hope and Glory) is usually played at the Last Night of the Proms at
the Royal Albert Hall.
Ralph Vaughan Williams (1872-1958) wrote music for orchestras and
choirs. He was strongly influenced by traditional English folk music.
Sir William Walton (1902-83) wrote a wide range of music, from film
scores to opera. He wrote marches for the coronations of King George VI
and Queen Elizabeth II but his best-known works are probably Façade, which
became a ballet, and Balthazar’s Feast, which is intended to be sung by a
large choir.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 19

The Royal Albert Hall is the venue for the Last Night of the Proms

Benjamin Britten (1913-76) is best known for his operas, which include
Peter Grimes and Billy Budd. He also wrote A Young Person’s Guide to the
Orchestra, which is based on a piece of music by Purcell and introduces the
listener to the various different sections of an orchestra. He founded the
Aldeburgh festival in Suffolk, which continues to be a popular music event of
international importance.
Other types of popular music, including folk music, jazz, pop and rock music,
have flourished in Britain since the 20th century. Britain has had an impact
on popular music around the world, due to the wide use of the English
language, the UK’s cultural links with many countries, and British capacity for
invention and innovation.
Since the 1960s, British pop music has made one of the most important
cultural contributions to life in the UK. Bands including The Beatles and The
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 20

Rolling Stones continue to have an influence on music both here and abroad.
British pop music has continued to innovate – for example, the Punk
movement of the late 1970s, and the trend towards boy and girl bands in the
1990s.
There are many large venues that host music events throughout the year,
such as: Wembley Stadium; The O2 in Greenwich, south-east London; and
the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre (SECC) in Glasgow.
Festival season takes place across the UK every summer, with major events
in various locations. Famous festivals include Glastonbury, the Isle of Wight
Festival and the V Festival. Many bands and solo artists, both well-known
and up-and-coming, perform at these events.
The National Eisteddfod of Wales is an annual cultural festival which includes
music, dance, art and original performances largely in Welsh. It includes a
number of important competitions for Welsh poetry.
The Mercury Music Prize is awarded each September for the best album from
the UK and Ireland. The Brit Awards is an annual event that gives awards in
a range of categories, such as best British group and best British solo artist.

Theatre

There are theatres in most towns and cities throughout the UK, ranging from
the large to the small. They are an important part of local communities and
often show both professional and amateur productions. London’s west end,
also known as ‘Theatreland’, is particularly well known. The Mousetrap, a
murder-mystery play by Dame Agatha Christie, has been running in the west
end since 1952 and has had the longest initial run of any show in history.
There is also a strong tradition of musical theatre in the UK. In the 19th
century, Gilbert and Sullivan wrote comic operas, often making fun of
popular culture and politics. These operas include HMS Pinafore, The Pirates
of Penzance and The Mikado. Gilbert and Sullivan’s work is still often staged
by professional and amateur groups. More recently, Andrew Lloyd Webber
has written the music for shows which have been popular throughout the
world, including, in collaboration with Tim Rice, Jesus Christ Superstar and
Evita, and also Cats and The Phantom of the Opera.
One British tradition is the pantomime. Many theatres produce a pantomime
at Christmas time. They are based on fairy stories and are light-hearted
plays with music and comedy, enjoyed by family audiences. One of the
traditional characters is the Dame, a woman played by a man. There is often
also a pantomime horse or cow played by two actors in the same costume.
The Edinburgh Festival takes place in Edinburgh, Scotland, every summer. It
is a series of different arts and cultural festivals, with the biggest and most
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 21

well-known being the Edinburgh Festival Fringe (‘the Fringe’). The Fringe is a
showcase of mainly theatre and comedy performances. It often shows
experimental work.
The Laurence Olivier Awards take place annually at different venues in
London. There are a variety of categories, including best director, best actor
and best actress. The awards are named after the British actor Sir Laurence
Olivier, late Lord Olivier, who was best known for his roles in various
Shakespeare plays.

Art
During the Middle Ages, most art had a religious theme, particularly wall
paintings in churches and illustrations in religious books. Much of this was
lost after the Protestant Reformation but wealthy families began to collect
other paintings and sculptures. Many of the painters working in Britain in the
16th and 17th centuries were from abroad-for example, Hans Holbein and Sir
Anthony Van Dyck. British artists, particularly those painting portraits and
landscapes, became well known from the 18th century onwards.
Works by British and international artists are displayed in Galleries across the
UK. Some of the most well-known galleries are The National Gallery, Tate
Britain and Tate Modern in London, the National Museum in Cardiff, and the
National Gallery of Scotland in Edinburgh.

Notable British artists
Thomas Gainsborough (1727-88) was a portrait painter who often
painted people in country or garden scenery.
David Allan (1744-96) was a Scottish painter who was best known for
painting portraits. One of his most famous works is called The Origin of
Painting.
Joseph Turner (1775-1851) was an influential landscape painter in a
modern style. He is considered the artist who raised the profile of landscape
painting.
John Constable (1776-1837) was a landscape painter most famous for his
works of Dedham Vale on the Suffolk-Essex border in the east of England.
The Pre-Raphaelites were an important group of artists in the second half
of the 19th century. They painted detailed pictures on religious or literary
themes in bright colours. The group included Holman Hunt, Dante Gabriel
Rossetti and Sir John Millais.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 22

Sir John Lavery (1856-1941) was a very successful Northern Irish portrait
painter. His work included painting the Royal Family.
Henry Moore (1898-1986) was an English sculptor and artist. He is best
known for his large bronze abstract sculptures.
John Petts (1914-91) was a Welsh artist, best known for his engravings
and stained glass.
Lucian Freud (1922-2011) was a German-born British artist. He is best
known for his portraits.
David Hockney (1937-) was an important contributor to the ‘pop art’
movement of the 1960s and continues to be influential today.

Tate Modern is based in the former Bankside Power Station in central London

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 23

The Turner Prize was established in 1984 and celebrates contemporary art.
It was named after Joseph Turner. Four works are shortlisted every year and
shown at Tate Britain before the winner is announced. The Turner Prize is
recognised as one of the most prestigious visual art awards in Europe.
Previous winners include Damien Hirst and Richard Wright.

Architecture
The architectural heritage of the UK is rich and varied. In the Middle Ages,
great cathedrals and churches were built, many of which still stand today.
Examples are the cathedrals in Durham, Lincoln, Canterbury and Salisbury.
The White Tower in the Tower of London is an example of a Norman castle
keep, built on the orders of William the Conqueror.
Gradually, as the countryside became more peaceful and landowners became
richer, the houses of the wealthy became more elaborate and great country
houses such as Hardwick Hall in Derbyshire were built. British styles of
architecture began to evolve.
In the 17th century, Inigo Jones took inspiration from classical architecture to
design the Queen’s House at Greenwich and the Banqueting House in
Whitehall in London. Later in the century, Sir Christopher Wren helped
develop a British version of the ornate styles popular in Europe in buildings
such as the new St Paul’s Cathedral.
In the 18th century, simpler designs became popular. The Scottish architect
Robert Adam influenced the development of architecture in the UK, Europe
and America. He designed the inside decoration as well as the building itself
in great houses such as Dumfries House in Scotland. His ideas influenced
architects in cities such as Bath, where the Royal Crescent was built.
In the 19th century, the medieval 'gothic' style became popular again. As
cities expanded, many great public buildings were built in this style. The
Houses of Parliament and St Pancras Station were built at this time, as were
the town halls in cities such as Manchester and Sheffield.
In the 20th century, Sir Edwin Lutyens had an influence throughout the British
Empire. He designed New Delhi to be the seat of government in India. After
the First World War, he was responsible for many war memorials throughout
the world, including the Cenotaph in Whitehall. The Cenotaph is the site of
the annual Remembrance Day service attended by the Queen, politicians and
foreign ambassadors.
Modern British architects including Sir Norman Foster, Lord (Richard) Rogers
and Dame Zaha Hadid continue to work on major projects throughout the
world as well as within the UK.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 24

Alongside the development of architecture, garden design and landscaping
have played an important role in the UK. In the 18th century, Lancelot
‘Capability’ Brown designed the grounds around country houses so that the
landscape appeared to be natural, with grass, trees and lakes. He often said
that a place had 'capabilities'. Later, Gertrude Jekyll often worked with
worked with Edwin Lutyens to design colourful gardens around the houses he
designed. Gardens continue to be an important part of homes in the UK.
The annual Chelsea Flower Show showcases garden design from Britain and
around the world.

Fashion and design
Britain has produced many great designers, from Thomas Chippendale (who
designed furniture in the 18th century) to Clarice Cliff (who designed Art Deco
ceramics) to Sir Terence Conran (a 20th-century interior designer). Leading
fashion designers of recent years include Mary Quant, Alexander McQueen
and Vivienne Westwood.

Literature
The UK has a prestigious literary history and tradition. Several British
writers, including the novelist Sir William Golding, the poet Seamus Heaney,
and the playwright Harold Pinter, have won the Nobel Prize in Literature.
Other authors have become well known in popular fiction. Agatha Christie’s
detective stories are read all over the world and Ian Fleming’s books
introduced James Bond. In 2003, The Lord of the Rings by JRR Tolkien was
voted the country’s best-loved novel.
The Man Booker Prize for Fiction is awarded annually for the best fiction
novel written by an author from the Commonwealth, Ireland or Zimbabwe.
It has been awarded since 1968. Past winners include Ian McEwan, Hilary
Mantel and Julian Barnes.

Notable authors and writers
Jane Austen (1775-1817) was an English novelist. Her books include
Pride and Prejudice and Sense and Sensibility. Her novels are concerned
with marriage and family relationships. Many have been made into television
programmes or films.
Charles Dickens (1812-70) wrote a number of very famous novels,
including Oliver twist and Great Expectations. You will hear references in
everyday talk to some of the characters in his books, such as Scrooge (a
mean person) or Mr Micawber (always hopeful).

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 25

Robert Louis Stevenson (1850-94) wrote books which are still read by
adults and children today. His most famous books include Treasure Island,
Kidnapped and Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde.
Thomas Hardy (1840-1928) was an author and poet.
His best-known
novels focus on rural society and include Far from the Madding Crowd and
Jude the Obscure.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (1859-1930) was a Scottish doctor and writer.
He was best known for his stories about Sherlock Holmes, who was one of
the first fictional detectives.
Evelyn Waugh (1903-66) wrote satirical novels, including Decline and Fall
and Scoop. He is perhaps best known for Brideshead Revisited.
Sir Kingsley Amis (1922-95) was an English novelist and poet. He wrote
more than 20 novels. The most well known is Lucky Jim.
Graham Greene (1904-91) wrote novels often influenced by his religious
beliefs, including The Heart of the Matter, The Honorary Consul, Brighton
Rock and Our Man in Havana.
J K Rowling (1965-) wrote the Harry Potter series of children’s books,
which have enjoyed huge international success. She now writes fiction for
adults as well.

British poets
British poetry is among the richest in the world. The Anglo-Saxon poem
Beowulf tells of its hero’s battles against monsters and is still translated into
modern English.
Poems which survive from the Middle Ages include
Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales and a poem called Sir Gawain and the Green
Knight, about one of the knights at the court of King Arthur.
As well as plays, Shakespeare wrote many sonnets (poems which must be 14
lines long) and some longer poems. As Protestant ideas spread, a number of
poets wrote poems inspired by their religious views. One of these was John
Milton, who wrote Paradise Lost.
Other poets, including William Wordsworth, were inspired by nature. Sir
Walter Scott wrote poems inspired by Scotland and the traditional stories and
songs from the area on the borders of Scotland and England. He also wrote
novels, many of which were set in Scotland.
Poetry was very popular in the 19th century, with poets such as William
Blake, John Keats, Lord Byron, Percy Shelley, Alfred Lord Tennyson, and
Robert and Elizabeth Browning.
Later, many poets-for example, Wilfred
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 26

Owen and Siegfried Sassoon – were inspired to write about their experiences
in the First World War. More recently, popular poets have included Sir Walter
de la Mare, John Masefield, Sir John Betjeman and Ted Hughes.
Some of the best-known poets are buried or commemorated in Poet’s Corner
in Westminster Abbey.
Some famous lines include:
‘Oh, to be in England now that April’s there
And whoever wakes in England sees, some morning, unaware,
That the lowest boughs and the brushwood sheaf
Round the elm-tree bole are in tiny leaf
While the Chaffinch sings on the orchard bough
In England – Now!’
(Robert Browning, 1812-89 – Home Thoughts from Abroad)
‘She walks in beauty, like the night
Of cloudless climes and starry skies,
All that’s best of dark and bright
Meet in her aspect and her eyes’
(Lord Byron, 1788-1824 – She walks in Beauty)
‘I wander’d lonely as a cloud
That floats on high o’er vales and hills
When all at once I saw a crowd,
A host of golden daffodils’
(William Wordsworth, 1770-1850 – The Daffodils)
‘Tyger! Tyger! Burning bright
In the forests of the night,
What immortal hand and eye
Could frame thy fearful symmetry?’
(William Blake, 1757-1827 – The Tyger)
‘What passing-bells for these who die as cattle?
Only the monstrous anger of the guns.
Only the stuttering rifles’ rapid rattle
Can patter out their hasty orisons.’
(Wilfred Owen, 1893-1918 – Anthem for Doomed Youth)
Check that you understand
• Which sports are particularly popular in the UK
• Some of the major sporting events that take place each year
• Some of the major arts and culture events that happen in the UK
• How achievements in arts and culture are formally recognised
• Important figures in British literature
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 27

Leisure
People in the UK spend their leisure time in many different ways.

Gardening
A lot of people have gardens at home and will spend their free time looking
after them. Some people rent additional land called ‘an allotment’, where
they grow fruit and vegetables. Gardening and flower shows range from
major national exhibitions to small local events. Many towns have garden
centres selling plants and gardening equipment. There are famous gardens
to visit throughout the UK, including Kew Gardens, Sissinghurst and Hidcote
in England, Crathes Castle and Inveraray Castle in Scotland, Bodnant Garden
in Wales, and Mount Stewart in Northern Ireland.
The countries that make up the UK all have flowers
which are particularly associated with them and which
are sometimes worn on national saints’ days:
•
•
•
•

England – the rose
Scotland – the thistle
Wales – the daffodil
Northern Ireland – the shamrock.

Shopping
There are many different places to go shopping in the UK. Most towns and
cities have a central shopping area, which is called the town centre.
Undercover shopping centres are also common – these might be in town
centres or on the outskirts of a town or city. Most shops in the UK are open
seven days a week, although trading hours on Sundays and public holidays
are generally reduced. Many towns also have markets on one or more days
a week, where stallholders sell a variety of goods.

Cooking and food
Many people in the UK enjoy cooking. They often invite each other to their
homes for dinner. A wide variety of food is eaten in the UK because of the
country’s rich cultural heritage and diverse population.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 28

Traditional foods
There are a variety of foods that are traditionally associated with different
parts of the UK:
• England: Roast beef, which is served with potatoes, vegetables, Yorkshire
puddings (batter that is baked in the oven) and other accompaniments. Fish
and chips are also popular.
• Wales: welsh cakes – traditional Welsh snack made from flour, dried fruits
and spices, and served either hot or cold.
• Scotland: Haggis – a sheep’s stomach stuffed with offal. Suet, onions and
oatmeal.
• Northern Ireland: Ulster fry – a fried meal with bacon, eggs, sausage,
black pudding, tomatoes, mushrooms, soda bread and potato bread.

Films
British film industry
The UK has had a major influence on modern cinema.
Films were first shown publicly in the UK in 1896 and film screenings very
quickly became popular. From the beginning, British film makers became
famous for clever special effects and this continues to be an area of British
expertise. From the early days of the cinema, British actors have worked in
both UK and USA. Sir Charles (Charlie) Chaplin became famous in silent
movies for his tramp character and was one of many British actors to make a
career in Hollywood.
British studios flourished in the 1930s.
Eminent directors included Sir
Alexander Korda and Sir Alfred Hitchcock, who later left for Hollywood and
remained an important film director until his death in 1980. During the
Second World War, British movies (for example, In Which We Serve) played
an important part in boosting morale. Later, British directors including Sir
David Lean and Ridley Scott found great success both in the UK and
internationally.
The 1950s and 1960s were a high point for British comedies, including
Passport to Pimlico, The Ladykilllers and, later, the Carry On Films.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 29

Many of the films now produced in the UK are made by foreign companies,
using British expertise. Some of the most commercially successful films of all
time, including the two highest-grossing film franchises (Harry Potter and
James Bond), have been produced in the UK. Ealing Studios has a claim to
being the oldest continuously working film studio facility in the world. Britain
continues to be particularly strong in special effects and animation. One
example is the work of Nick Park, who has won four Oscars for his animated
films, including three for films featuring Wallace and Gromit.
Actors such as Sir Lawrence Olivier, David Niven, Sir Rex Harrison and
Richard Burton starred in a wide variety of popular films. British actors
continue to be popular and continue to win awards throughout the world.
Recent British actors to have won Oscars include Colin Firth, Sir Antony
Hopkins, Dame Judi Dench, Kate Winslet and Tilda Swinton.
The annual British Academy Film Awards, hosted by the British Academy of
Film and Television Arts (BAFTA), are the British equivalent of the Oscars.

Some famous British films
• The 39 Steps (1935), directed by Alfred Hitchcock
• Brief Encounter (1945), directed by David Lean
• The Third Man (1949), directed by Carol Reed
• The Belles of St Trinian’s (1954), directed by Frank Launder
• Lawrence of Arabia (1962), directed by David Lean
• Women in Love (1969), directed by Ken Russel
• Don’t Look Now (1973), directed by Nicolas Roeg
• Chariots of Fire (1981), directed by Hugh Hudson
• The Killing Fields (1984), directed by Roland Joffé
• Four Weddings and a Funeral (1994), directed by Mike Newell
• Touching the Void (2003), directed by Kevin MacDonald.

British comedy
The traditions of comedy and satire, and the ability to laugh at ourselves, are
an important part of the UK character.
Medieval kings and rich nobles had jesters who told jokes and made fun of
people in the Court. Later, Shakespeare included comic characters in his
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 30

plays. In the 18th century, political cartoons attacking prominent politicians –
and, sometimes, the monarch or other members of the Royal Family –
became increasingly popular. In the 19th century, satirical magazines began
to be published. The most famous was Punch, which was published for the
first time in the 1840s. Today, political cartoons continue to be published in
newspapers, and magazines such as Private Eye continue the tradition of
satire.
Comedians were a popular feature of British music hall, a form of variety
theatre which was very common until television became the leading form of
entertainment in the UK. Some of the people who had performed in the
music halls in the 1940s and 1950s, such as Morecambe and Wise, became
stars of television.
Television comedy developed its own style. Situation comedies, or sitcoms,
which often look at family life and relationships in the workplace, remain
popular. Satire has also continued to be important, with shows like That Was
The Week That Was in the 1960s and Spitting Image in the 1980s and
1990s. In 1969, Monty Python’s Flying Circus introduced a new type of
progressive comedy. Stand-up comedy, where a solo comedian talks to a
live audience, has become popular again in recent years.

Television and radio
Many different television (TV) channels are available in the UK. Some are
free to watch a wide variety of programmes. Popular programmes include
regular soap operas such as Coronation Street and EastEnders. In Scotland,
some Scotland-specific programmes are shown and there is also a channel
with programmes in the Gaelic language. There is a Welsh-language channel
in Wales. There are also programmes specific to Northern Ireland and some
programmes broadcast in Irish Gaelic.
Everyone in the UK with a TV, computer or other medium which can be used
for watching TV must have a television licence. One licence covers all of the
equipment in one home, except when people rent different rooms in a shared
house and each has a separate tenancy agreement – those people must each
buy a separate licence. People over 75 can apply for a free TV licence and
blind people can get a 50% discount. You will receive a fine up to £1,000 if
you watch TV but do not have a TV licence.
The money from TV licences is used to pay for the British Broadcasting
Corporation (BBC). This is a public service broadcaster providing television
and radio programmes. The BBC is the largest broadcaster in the world. It
is the only wholly state-funded media organisation that is independent of
government.
Other UK channels are primarily funded through
advertisements and subscriptions.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 31

There are also many different radio stations in the UK. Some broadcast
nationally and others in certain cities or regions. There are radio stations
that play certain types of music and some broadcast in regional languages
such as Welsh or Gaelic. Like television, BBC radio stations are funded by TV
licences and other radio stations are funded through advertisements.

Social networking
Social networking websites such as Facebook and Twitter are a popular way
for people to stay in touch with friends, organise social events, and share
photos, videos and opinions. Many people use social networking on their
mobile phones when out and about.

Pubs and night clubs
Public houses (pubs) are an important part of the UK social culture. Many
people enjoy meeting friends in the pub. Most communities will have a ‘local’
pub that is a natural focal point for social activities. Pub quizzes are popular.
Pool and darts are traditional pub games. To buy alcohol in a pub or night
club you must be 18 or over, but people under that age may be allowed in
some pubs with an adult. When they are 16, people can drink wine or beer
with a meal in a hotel or restaurant (including eating areas in pubs) as long
as they are with someone over 18.
Pubs are usually open during the day from 11.00 am (12 noon on Sundays).
Night clubs with dancing and music usually open and close later than pubs.
The licensee decides the hours that the pub or night club is open.

Betting and gambling
In the UK, people often enjoy a gamble on sports or other events. There are
also casinos in many places. You have to be 18 to go into betting shops or
gambling clubs. There is a National Lottery for which draws are made every
week. You can enter by buying a ticket or a scratch card. People under 16
are not allowed to participate in the National Lottery.

Pets
A lot of people in the UK have pets such as cats or dogs. They might have
them for company or because they enjoy looking after them. It is against
the law to treat a pet cruelly or to neglect it. All dogs in public places must
wear a collar showing the name and address of the owner. The owner is
responsible for keeping the dog under control and for cleaning up after the
animal in a public place.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 32

Vaccinations and medical treatment for animals are available from veterinary
surgeons (vets). There are charities which may help people who cannot
afford to pay a vet.

Places of interest
The UK has a large network of public footpaths in the countryside. There are
also many opportunities for mountain biking, mountaineering and hill
walking. There are 15 national parks in England, Wales and Scotland. They
are areas of protected countryside that everyone can visit, and where people
live, work and look after the landscape.
There are many museums in the UK, which range from small community
museums to large national and civic collections. Famous landmarks exist in
towns, cities and the countryside throughout the UK. Most of them are open
to the public to view (generally for a charge).
Many parts of the countryside and places of interest are kept open by the
National Trust in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and the National Trust
for Scotland. Both are charities that work to preserve important buildings,
coastline and countryside in the UK. The National Trust was founded in 1895
by three volunteers. There are now more than 61,000 volunteers helping to
keep the organisation running.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 33

UK landmarks

Big Ben
Big Ben is the nickname for the great bell of the clock at the House of
Parliament in London. Many people call the clock Big Ben as well.
The clock is over 150 years old and is a popular tourist attraction. The
clock is named ‘Elizabeth Tower’ in honour of Queen Elizabeth II’s
Diamond Jubilee in 2012.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 34

The Eden Project
The Eden Project is located in Cornwall, in the south west of England. Its
biomes, which are like giant greenhouses, house plants from all over the
world. The Eden Project is also a charity which runs environmental and
social projects internationally.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 35

Edinburgh Castle
The castle is a dominant feature of the skyline in Edinburgh, Scotland. It
has a long history, dating back to the early Middle Ages. It is looked after
by Historic Scotland, a Scottish government agency.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 36

The Giant’s Causeway
Located on the north-east coast of Northern Ireland, the Giant’s Causeway
is a land formation of columns made from volcanic lava. It was formed
about 50 million years ago. There are many legends about the Causeway
and how it was formed.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 37

Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park
This national park covers 720 square miles (1,865 square kilometres) in
the west of Scotland. Loch Lomond is the largest expanse of fresh water
in mainland Britain and probably the best-known part of the park.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 38

London Eye
The London Eye is situated on the southern bank of the River Thames and
is a Ferris wheel that is 443 feet (135 metres) tall. It was originally built
as part of the UK’s celebration of the new millennium and continues to be
an important part of New Year celebrations.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 39

Snowdonia
Snowdonia is a national park in North Wales. It covers an area of 838
square miles (2,170 square kilometres). Its most well-known landmark is
Snowdon, which is the highest mountain in Wales.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 40

The Tower of London
The Tower of London was first built by William the Conqueror after he
became king in 1066. Tours are given by the Yeoman Warders, also
known as Beefeaters, who tell visitors about the building’s history.
People can also see the Crown Jewels there.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 41

The Lake District
The Lake District is England’s largest national park. It covers 885
square miles (2,292 square kilometres). It is famous for its lakes and
mountains and is very popular with climbers, walkers and sailors. The
biggest stretch of water is Windermere. In 2007, television viewers
voted Wastwater as Britain’s favourite view.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 4: A Modern, Thriving Society - Page 42

Check that you understand
• Some of the ways in which people in the UK spend their leisure time
• The development of British cinema
• What the television licence is and how it funds the BBC
• Some of the places of interest to visit in the UK

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

