UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 1

Chapter 3 - A Long and
Illustrious History

Chapter contents
• Early Britain
• The Middle Ages
• The Tudors and Stuarts
• A global power
• The 20th century
• Britain since 1945

Early Britain
The first people to live in Britain were hunter-gatherers, in what we call the
Stone Age. For much of the Stone Age, Britain was connected to the
continent by a land bridge. People came and went, following the herds of
deer and horses which they hunted. Britain only became permanently
separated from the continent by the Channel about 10,000 years ago.
The first farmers arrived in Britain 6,000 years ago. The ancestors of these
first farmers probably came from south-east Europe. These people built
houses, tombs and monuments on the land.
One of these monuments,
Stonehenge, still stands in what is now the English county of Wiltshire.
Stonehenge was probably a special gathering place for seasonal ceremonies.
Other Stone Age sites have also survived. Skara Brae on Orkney, off the
north coast of Scotland, is the best preserved prehistoric village in northern
Europe, and has helped archaeologists to understand more about how people
lived near the end of the Stone Age.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 2

The World Heritage Site of Stonehenge

Around 4,000 years ago, people learned to make bronze. We call this period
the Bronze Age. People lived in roundhouses and buried their dead in tombs
called round barrows. The people of the Bronze Age were accomplished
metalworkers who made many beautiful objects in bronze and gold, including
tools, ornaments and weapons. The Bronze Age was followed by the Iron
Age, when people learned how to make weapons and tools out of iron.
People still lived in roundhouses grouped together into larger settlements,
and sometimes defended sites called hill forts. A very impressive hill fort can
still be seen today at Maiden Castle, in the English county of Dorset. Most
people were farmers, craft workers or warriors. The language they spoke
was part of the Celtic language family. Similar languages were spoken
across Europe in the Iron Age and related languages are still spoken today in
some parts of Wales, Scotland and Ireland. The people of the Iron Age had a
sophisticated culture and economy. They made the first coins to be minted
in Britain, some inscribed with the names of Iron Age kings. This marks the
beginnings of British history.

The Romans
Julius Caesar led a Roman invasion of Britain in 55 BC.
This was
unsuccessful and for nearly 100 years Britain remained separate from the
Roman Empire. In AD 43 the Emperor Claudius led the Roman army in a
new invasion. This time, there was resistance from some of the British tribes
but the Romans were successful in occupying almost all of Britain. One of
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 3

the tribal leaders who fought against the Romans was Boudicca, the queen of
the Iceni in what is now eastern England. She is still remembered today and
there is a statue of her on Westminster Bridge in London, near the Houses of
Parliament.
Areas of what is now Scotland were never conquered by the Romans, and the
Emperor Hadrien built a wall in the north of England to keep out the Picts
(ancestors of the Scottish people). Included in the wall were a number of
forts.
Parts of Hadrien’s Wall, including the forts of Housesteads and
Vindolanda, can still be seen. It is a popular area for walkers and is a
UNESCO (United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization)
World Heritage Site.
The Romans remained in Britain for 400 years. They built roads and public
buildings, created a structure of law, and introduced new plants and animals.
It was during the 3rd and 4th centuries AD that the first Christian communities
began to appear in Britain.

The Anglo-Saxons
The Roman army left Britain in AD 410 to defend other parts of the Roman
Empire and never returned. Britain was again invaded by tribes from
northern Europe: the Jutes, the Angles and the Saxons. The languages they
spoke are the basis of modern-day English. Battles were fought against
these invaders but, by about AD 600, Anglo-Saxon kingdoms were
established in Britain. These kingdoms were mainly in what is now England.
The burial place of one of the kings was at Sutton Hoo in modern Suffolk.
This king was buried with treasure and armour, all placed in a ship which was
then covered by a mound of earth. Parts of the west of Britain, including
much of what is now Wales, and Scotland, remained free of Anglo-Saxon
rule.
The Anglo-Saxons were not Christians when they first came to Britain but,
during this period, missionaries came to Britain to preach about Christianity.
Missionaries from Ireland spread the religion in the north. The most famous
of these were St Patrick, who would become the patron saint of Ireland, and
St Columba, who founded a monastery on the island of Iona, off the coast of
what is now Scotland. St Augustine led missionaries from Rome, who spread
Christianity in the south. St Augustine became the first Archbishop of
Canterbury.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 4

An Anglo-Saxon helmet found at Sutton Hoo - currently on display at the British Museum

The Vikings
The Vikings came from Denmark and Norway. They first visited Britain in AD
789 to raid coastal towns and take away goods and slaves. Then, they
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 5

began to stay and form their own communities in the east of England and
Scotland. The Anglo-Saxon kingdoms in England united under King Alfred
the Great, who defeated the Vikings. Many of the Viking invaders stayed in
Britain – especially in the east and north of England in an area known as the
Danelaw (many place names there, such as Grimsby and Scunthorpe come
from the Viking languages).
The Viking settlers mixed with local
communities and some converted to Christianity.
Anglo-Saxon kings continued to rule what is now England, except for a short
period when there were Danish kings. The first of these was Cnut, also
named Canute.
In the north, the threat of attack by Vikings had encouraged the people to
unite under one king, Kenneth MacAlpin. The term Scotland began to be
used to describe that country.

The Norman Conquest
In 1066, an invasion led by William, the Duke of Normandy (in what is now
northern France), defeated Harold, the Saxon king of England, at the Battle
of Hastings. Harold was killed in the battle. William became king of England
and is known as William the Conqueror. The battle is commemorated in a
great piece of embroidery, known as the Bayeux tapestry, which can still be
seen in France today.

Part of the Bayeux Tapestry - the linen cloth is nearly 70 metres (230 feet) long and is
embroidered with coloured wool

The Norman Conquest was the last successful foreign invasion of England
and led to many changes in government and social structures in England.
Norman French, the language of the new ruling class influenced the
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 6

development of the English language as we know it today. Initially the
Normans also conquered Wales, but the Welsh gradually won territory back.
The Scots and the Normans fought on the border between England and
Scotland; the Normans took over some land on the border but did not invade
Scotland.
William sent people all over England to draw up lists of all the towns and
villages. The people who lived there, who owned the land and what animals
they owned were also listed. This was called the Domesday Book. It still
exists today and gives a picture of society in England just after the Norman
Conquest.

Check that you understand
• The history of the UK before the Romans
• The impact of the Romans on British society
• The different groups that invaded after the Romans
• The importance of the Norman invasion in 1066

The Middle Ages
War at home and abroad
The period after the Norman Conquest up until about 1485 is called the
Middle Ages (or the medieval period). It was a time of almost constant war.
The English kings fought with the Welsh, Scottish and Irish noblemen for
control of their lands. In Wales, the English were able to establish their rule.
In 1284 King Edward I of England introduced the Statute of Rhuddlan, which
annexed Wales to the Crown of England. Huge castles, including Conwy and
Caenarvon, were built to maintain this power. By the middle of the 15th
century the last Welsh rebellions had been defeated. English laws and the
English language were introduced.
In Scotland, the English kings were less successful. In 1314 the Scottish, led
by Robert the Bruce, defeated the English at the Battle of Bannockburn, and
Scotland remained unconquered by the English.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 7

At the beginning of the Middle Ages, Ireland was an independent country.
The English first went to Ireland as troops to help the Irish king and
remained to build their own settlements. By 1200, the English ruled an area
of Ireland known as the Pale, around Dublin. Some of the important lords in
other parts of Ireland accepted the authority of the English king.
During the Middle Ages, the English kings also fought a number of wars
abroad.
Many knights took part in the Crusades, in which European
Christians fought for control of the Holy Land. English kings also fought a
long war with France, called the Hundred Years War (even though it actually
lasted 116 years). One of the most famous battles of the Hundred Years War
was the Battle of Agincourt in 1415, where King Henry V’s vastly
outnumbered English army defeated the French. The English left France in
the 1450s.

The Black Death
The Normans used a system of land ownership known as feudalism. The king
gave land to his lords in return for help in war. Landowners had to send
certain numbers of men to serve in the army. Some peasants had their own
land but most were serfs. They had a small area of their lord’s land where
they could grow food. In return, they had to work for their lord and could
not move away. The same system developed in southern Scotland. In the
north of Scotland and Ireland, land was owned by members of the ‘clans’
(prominent families).
In 1348, a disease, probably a form of plague, came to Britain. This was
known as the Black Death. One third of the population of England died and a
similar proportion in Scotland and Wales. This was one of the worst disasters
ever to strike Britain. Following the Black Death, the smaller population
meant there was less need to grow cereal crops.
There were labour
shortages and peasants began to demand higher wages. New social classes
appeared, including owners of large areas of land (later called the gentry),
and people left the countryside to live in the towns. In the towns, growing
wealth led to the development of a strong middle class.
In Ireland, the Black Death killed many in the Pale and, for a time, the area
controlled by the English became smaller.

Legal and political changes
In the Middle Ages, Parliament began to develop into the institution it is
today. Its origins can be traced to the king’s council of advisers, which
included important noblemen and the leaders of the Church.
There were few formal limits to the king’s power until 1215. In that year,
King John was forced by his noblemen to agree to a number of demands. The
result was a charter of rights called the Magna Carta (which means the
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 8

Great Charter). The Magna Carta established the idea that even the king
was subject to the law. It protected the rights of the nobility and restricted
the king’s power to collect taxes or to make and change laws. In future, the
king would need to involve his noblemen in decisions.
In England, parliaments were called for the king to consult his nobles,
particularly when the king needed to raise money. The numbers attending
Parliament increased and two separate parts, known as Houses were
established. This nobility, great landowners and bishops sat in the House of
Lords. Knights, who were usually smaller landowners, and wealthy people
from towns and cities were elected to sit in the House of Commons. Only a
small part of the population was able to join in electing the members of the
Commons.
A similar Parliament developed in Scotland. It had three Houses, called
Estates: the lords, the commons and the clergy.
This was also a time of development in the legal system. The principle that
judges are independent of the government began to be established. In
England, judges developed ‘common law’ by a process of precedence (that is,
following previous decisions) and tradition. In Scotland, the legal system
developed slightly differently and laws were ‘codified’ (that is, written down).

A distinct identity
The Middle Ages saw the development of a national culture and identity.
After the Norman Conquest, the king and his noblemen had spoken Norman
French and the peasants had continued to speak Anglo-Saxon. Gradually
these two languages combined to become one English language. Some
words in modern English – for example, ‘park’ and ‘beauty’ – are based on
Norman French words. Other – for example, ‘apple’, ‘cow’ and ‘summer’ –
are based on Anglo-Saxon words. In modern English there are often two
words with very similar meanings, one from French and one from AngloSaxon. ‘Demand’ (French) and ‘ask’ (Anglo-Saxon) are examples. By 1400,
in England, official documents were being written in English, and English had
become the preferred language of the royal court and Parliament.
In the years leading up to 1400, Geoffrey Chaucer wrote a series of poems in
English about a group of people going to Canterbury on a pilgrimage. The
people decided to tell each other stories on the journey, and the poems
describe the travellers and some of the stories they told. This collection of
poems is called The Canterbury Tales. It was one of the first books to be
printed by William Caxton, the first person in England to print books using a
printing press. Many of the stories are still popular. Some have been made
into plays and television programmes.
In Scotland, many people continued to speak Gaelic and the Scots language
also developed. A number of poets began to write in the Scots language.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 9

One example is John Barbour, who wrote The Bruce about the Battle of
Bannockburn.
The Middle Ages also saw a change in the type of buildings in Britain. Castles
were built in many places in Britain and Ireland, partly for defence. Today
many are in ruins, although some, such as Windsor and Edinburgh, are still
in use. Great cathedrals – for example, Lincoln Cathedral – were also built,
and many of these are still used for worship. Several of the cathedrals had
windows of stained glass, telling stories about the Bible and Christian saints.
The glass in York Minster is a famous example.
During this period, England was an important trading nation. English wool
became a very important export. People came to England from abroad to
trade and also to work. Many had special skills, such as weavers from
France, engineers from Germany, glass manufacturers from Italy and canal
builders from Holland.

York Minster stained glass

The Wars of the Roses
In 1455, a civil war was begun to decide who should be king of England. It
was fought between the supporters of two families: the House of Lancaster
and the House of York. This war was called the Wars of the Roses, because
the symbol of Lancaster was a red rose and the symbol of York was a white
rose. The war ended with the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485. King Richard
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 10

III of the House of York was killed in the battle and Henry Tudor, the leader
of the House of Lancaster, became King Henry VII. Henry then married King
Richard’s niece, Elizabeth of York, and united the two families. Henry was
the first king of the House of Tudor. The symbol of the House of Tudor was a
red rose with a white rose inside it as a sign that the Houses of York and
Lancaster were now allies.

Check that you understand
• The wars that took place in the Middle Ages
• How Parliament began to develop
• The way that land ownership worked
• The effects of the Black Death
• The development of English language and culture
• The Wars of the Roses the founding of the House of Tudor

The Tudors and Stuarts
Religious conflicts
After his victory in the Wars of the Roses, Henry VII wanted to make sure
that England remained peaceful and that his position as king was secure. He
deliberately strengthened the central administration of England and reduced
the power of the nobles. He was thrifty and built up the monarchy’s financial
reserves.
When he died, his son Henry VIII continued the policy of
centralising power.
Henry VIII was most famous for breaking away from the Church of Rome and
marrying six times.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 11

Henry VIII was king of England from 21 April 1509 until his death on 28 January 1547

The six wives of Henry VIII
Catherine of Aragon – Catherine was a Spanish princess. She and Henry
had a number of children but only one, Mary, survived. When Catherine was
too old to give him another child, Henry decided to divorce her, hoping that
another wife would give him a son to be his heir.
Anne Boleyn – Anne Boleyn was English. She and Henry had one daughter,
Elizabeth. Anne was unpopular in the country and was accused of taking
lovers. She was executed at the tower of London.
Jane Seymour – Henry married Jane after Anne’s execution. She gave
Henry the son he wanted, Edward, but she died shortly after his birth.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 12

Anne of Cleves – Anne was a German princess.
political reasons but divorced her soon after.

Henry married her for

Catherine Howard – Catherine was a cousin of Anne Boleyn. She was also
accused of taking lovers and executed.
Catherine Parr – Catherine was a widow who married Henry later in his life.
She survived him and married again but died soon after.
To divorce his first wife, Henry needed the approval of the Pope. When the
Pope refused, Henry established the Church of England. In this new church,
the king, not the Pope, would have the power to appoint bishops and order
how people should worship.
At the same time the Reformation was happening across Europe. This was a
movement against the authority of the Pope and the ideas and practices of
the Roman Catholic Church. The Protestants formed their own churches.
They read the Bible in their own languages instead of Latin; they did not pray
to saints or at shrines; and they believed that a person’s own relationship
with God was more important than submitting to the authority of the Church.
Protestant ideas gradually gained strength in England, Wales and Scotland
during the 16th century.
In Ireland, however, attempts by the English to impose Protestantism
(alongside efforts to introduce the English system of laws about the
inheritance of land) led to rebellion from the Irish chieftains, and much brutal
fighting followed.
During the reign of Henry VIII, Wales became formally united with England
by the Act for the Government of Wales. The Welsh sent representatives to
the House of Commons and the Welsh legal system was reformed.
Henry VIII was succeeded by his son Edward VI, who was strongly
Protestant. During his reign, the Book of Common Prayer was written to be
used in the Church of England. A version of this book is still used in some
churches today. Edward died at the age of 15 after ruling for just over six
years, and his half-sister Mary became queen. Mary was a devout Catholic
and persecuted Protestants (for this reason, she became known as ‘Bloody
Mary’). Mary also died after a short reign and the next monarch was her
half-sister, Elizabeth, the daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 13

Queen Elizabeth I

Elizabeth I was the younger daughter of Henry VIII

Queen Elizabeth I was a Protestant. She re-established the Church of
England as the official Church of England. Everyone had to attend their local
church and there were laws about the type of religious services and the
prayers which could be said, but Elizabeth did not ask about people’s real
beliefs. She succeeded in finding a balance between the views of the
Catholics and the more extreme Protestants. In this way, she avoided any
serious religious conflict within England. Elizabeth became one of the most
popular monarchs in English history, particularly after 1588, when the
English defeated the Spanish Armada (a large fleet of ships), which had been
sent by Spain to conquer England and restore Catholicism.

The Reformation in Scotland and Mary, Queen of Scots
Scotland had also been strongly influenced by Protestant ideas. In 1560, the
predominantly Protestant Scottish Parliament abolished the authority of the
Pope in Scotland and Roman Catholic religious services became illegal. A
Protestant Church of Scotland with an elected leadership was established but,
unlike in England, this was not a state Church.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 14

The queen of Scotland, Mary Stuart (often now called ‘Mary, Queen of Scots’)
was a Catholic. She was only a week old when her father died and she
became queen. Much of her childhood was spent in France. When she
returned to Scotland, she was the centre of a power struggle between
different groups. When her husband was murdered, Mary was suspected of
involvement and fled to England. She gave her throne to her Protestant son,
James VI of Scotland.
Mary was Elizabeth I’s cousin and hoped that
Elizabeth might help her, but Elizabeth suspected Mary of wanting to take
over the English throne, and kept her prisoner for 20 years. Mary was
eventually executed, accused of plotting against Elizabeth I.

Exploration, poetry and drama
The Elizabethan period in England was a time of growing patriotism: a feeling
of pride in being English, English explorers sought new trade routes and tried
to expand British trade into the Spanish colonies in the Americas. Sir Francis
Drake, one of the commanders in the defeat of the Spanish Armada, was one
of the founders of England’s naval tradition. His ship, the Golden Hind, was
one of the first to sail right around (‘circumnavigate’) the world. In Elizabeth
I’s time, English settlers first began to colonise the eastern coast of America.
This colonisation, particularly by people who disagreed with the religious
views of the next two kings, greatly increased in the next century.
The Elizabethan period is also remembered for the richness of its poetry and
drama, especially the plays and poems of William Shakespeare.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 16

Ireland
During this period, Ireland was an almost completely Catholic country.
Henry VII and Henry VIII had extended English control outside the Pale and
had established English authority over the whole country. Henry VIII took
the title ‘King of Ireland’. English laws were introduced and local leaders
were expected to follow the instructions of the Lord Lieutenants in Dublin.
During the reigns of Elizabeth I and James I, many people in Ireland opposed
rule by the Protestant government in England. There were a number of
rebellions.
The English government encouraged Scottish and English
Protestants to settle in Ulster, the northern province of Ireland, taking over
the land from Catholic landholders. These settlements were known as
plantations. Many of the new settlers came from south-west Scotland and
other land was given to companies based in London. James later organised
similar plantations in several other parts of Ireland. This had serious longterm consequence for the history of England, Scotland and Ireland.

The rise of Parliament
Elizabeth I was very skilled at managing Parliament. During her reign, she
was successful in balancing her wishes and views against those of the House
of Lords and those of the House of Commons, which was increasingly
Protestant in its views.
James I and his son Charles I were less skilled politically. Both believed in
the ‘Divine Right of Kings’: the idea that the king was directly appointed by
God to rule. They thought that the king should be able to act without having
to seek approval from Parliament. When Charles I inherited the thrones of
England, Wales, Ireland and Scotland, he tried to rule in line with this
principle. When he could not get Parliament to agree with his religious and
foreign policies, he tried to rule without the Parliament at all. For 11 years,
he found ways in which to raise money without Parliament’s approval but
eventually trouble in Scotland meant that he had to recall Parliament.

The beginning of the English Civil War
Charles I wanted the worship of the Church of England to include more
ceremony and introduced a revise Prayer Book. He tried to impose this
Prayer Book on the Presbyterian Church in Scotland and this led to serious
unrest. A Scottish army was formed and Charles could not find the money
he needed for his own army without the help of Parliament. In 1640, he
recalled Parliament to ask it for funds. Many in Parliament were Puritans, a
group of Protestants who advocated strict and simple religious doctrine and
worship. They did not agree with the king’s religious views and disliked his
reforms of the Church of England. Parliament refused to give the king the
money he asked for, even after the Scottish army invaded England.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 17

Another rebellion began in Ireland because the Roman Catholics in Ireland
were afraid of the growing power of the Puritans. Parliament took this
opportunity to demand control of the English army – a change that would
have transferred substantial power from the king to Parliament. In response,
Charles I entered the House of Commons and tried to arrest five
parliamentary leaders, but they had been warned and were not there. (No
monarch has set foot in the Commons since.) Civil war between the king and
Parliament could not now be avoided and began in 1642. The country spilt
into those who supported the king (the Cavaliers) and those who supported
Parliament (the Roundheads).

Oliver Cromwell and the English republic

Oliver Cromwell was the leader of the English republic

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 18

The king’s army was defeated at the Battles of Marston Moor and Naseby.
By 1646, it was clear that the Parliament had won the war. Charles was held
prisoner by the parliamentary army. He was still unwilling to reach any
agreement with the Parliament and in 1649 he was executed.
England declared itself a republic, called the Commonwealth. It no longer
had a monarch. For a time, it was not totally clear how the country would be
governed. For now, the army was in control. One of its generals, Oliver
Cromwell, was sent to Ireland, where the revolt which had begun in 1641 still
continued and where there was still a Royalist army.
Cromwell was
successful in establishing the authority of the English Parliament but did this
with such violence that even today Cromwell remains a controversial figure in
Ireland.
The Scots had not agreed to the execution of Charles I and declared his son
Charles II to be king. He was crowned king of Scotland and led a Scottish
army into England. Cromwell defeated this army in the Battles of Dunbar
and Worcester. Charles II escaped from Worcester, famously hiding in an
oak tree on one occasion, and eventually fled to Europe. Parliament now
controlled Scotland as well as England and Wales.
After his campaign in Ireland and victory over Charles II at Worcester,
Cromwell was recognised as the leader of the new republic. He was given
the title of Lord Protector and ruled until his death in 1658. When Cromwell
died, his son, Richard, became Lord Protector in his place but was not able to
control the army or the government. Although Britain had been a republic
for 11 years, without Oliver Cromwell there was no clear leader or system of
government. Many people in the country wanted stability. People began to
talk about the need for a king.

The Restoration
In May 1660, Parliament invited Charles II to come back from exile in The
Netherlands. He was crowned King Charles II of England, Wales, Scotland
and Ireland. Charles II made it clear that he had ‘no wish to go on his
travels again’. He understood that he could not always do as he wished but
would sometimes need to reach agreement with the Parliament. Generally,
Parliament supported his policies. The Church of England again became the
established official Church. Both Roman Catholics and Puritans were kept out
of power.
During Charles II’s reign, in 1665, there was a major outbreak of plague in
London. Thousands of people died, especially in poorer areas. The following
year, a great fire destroyed much of the city, including many churches and St
Paul’s Cathedral. London was rebuilt with a new St Paul’s, which was
designed by a famous architect, Sir Christopher Wren. Samuel Pepys wrote
about these events in a diary which was later published and is still read
today.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 19

The Habeas Corpus Act became law in 1679. This was a very important
piece of legislation which remains relevant today. Habeas corpus is Latin for
‘you must present the person in court’. The Act guaranteed that no one
could be held prisoner unlawfully.
Every prisoner has a right to a court
hearing.
Charles II was interested in science. During his reign, the Royal Society was
formed to promote ‘natural knowledge’. This is the oldest surviving scientific
society in the world. Among its early members were Sir Edmund Halley who
successfully predicted the return of the comet now called Halley’s Comet, and
Sir Isaac Newton.
Isaac Newton (1643-1727)
Born in Lincolnshire, eastern England, Isaac Newton first became interested
in science when he studied at Cambridge University.
He became an
important figure in the field.
His most famous published work was
Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (‘Mathematical Principle of
Natural Philosophy’), which showed how gravity applied to the whole
universe. Newton also discovered that white light is made up of the colours
of the rainbow. Many of his discoveries are still important for modern
science.

A Catholic king
Charles II had no legitimate children. He died in 1685 and his brother,
James, who was a Roman Catholic, became King James II in England, Wales
and Ireland and King James VII of Scotland.
James favoured Roman
Catholics and allowed them to be army officers, which an Act of Parliament
had forbidden. He did not seek to reach agreements with Parliament and
arrested some of the bishops of the Church of England. People in England
worried that James wanted to make England a Catholic country once more.
However, his heirs were his two daughters, who were both firmly Protestant,
and people thought that this meant there would soon be a Protestant
monarch again. Then James’s wife had a son. Suddenly, it seemed likely
that the next monarch would not be a Protestant after all.

The Glorious Revolution
James II’s elder daughter, Mary, was married to her cousin William of
Orange, the Protestant ruler of the Netherlands.
In 1688, important
Protestants in England asked William to invade England and proclaim himself
king. When William reached England, there was no resistance. James fled to
France and William took over the throne, becoming William III in England,
Wales and Ireland, and William II of Scotland. William ruled jointly with
Mary. This event was later called the ‘Glorious Revolution’ because there
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 20

was no fighting in England and because it guaranteed the power of
Parliament, ending the threat of monarch ruling on his or her own as he or
she wished. James II wanted to regain the throne and invaded Ireland with
the help of a French army. William defeated James II at the Battle of the
Boyne in Ireland in 1690, an event which is still celebrated by some in
Northern Ireland today. William re-conquered Ireland and James fled back to
France. Many restrictions were placed on the Roman Catholic Church in
Ireland and Irish Catholics were unable to take part in the government.
There was also support for James in Scotland. An attempt at an armed
rebellion in support of James was quickly defeated at Killiecrankie. All
Scottish clans were required formally to accept William as king by taking an
oath. The MacDonalds of Glencoe were late in taking an oath. The memory
of this massacre meant some Scots distrusted the new government.
Some continued to believe that James was the rightful king, particularly in
Scotland. Some joined him in exile in France; others were secret supporters.
James’ supporters became known as Jacobites.

Check that you understand
• How and why religion changed during this period
• The importance of poetry and drama in the Elizabethan period
• About the involvement of Britain in Ireland
• The development of Parliament and the only period in history when
England was a republic
• Why there was a restoration of the monarchy
• How the Glorious Revolution happened

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 21

A global power
Constitutional monarchy – the Bill of Rights
At the coronation of William and Mary, a Declaration of Rights was read. This
confirmed that the king would no longer be able to raise taxes and
administer justice without agreement from Parliament. The balance of power
between monarch and Parliament had now permanently changed. The Bill of
Rights, 1689, confirmed the rights of Parliament and the limits of the king’s
power. Parliament took control of who could be monarch and declared that
the king or queen must be a Protestant. A new Parliament had to be elected
at least every three years (later this became seven years and now it is five
years). Every year the monarch had to ask Parliament to renew funding for
the army and the navy.
These changes meant that, to be able to govern effectively, the monarch
needed to have advisers, or ministers, who would be able to ensure a
majority of votes in the House of Commons and the House of Lords. There
were two main groups in Parliament, known as the Whigs and the Tories.
(The modern Conservative Party is still sometimes referred to as the Tories.)
This was the beginning of party politics.
This was also an important time for the development of a free press
(newspapers and other publications which are not controlled by the
government). From 1695, newspapers were allowed to operate without a
government licence.
Increasing numbers of newspapers began to be
published.
The laws passed after the Glorious Revolution are the beginning of what is
called ‘constitutional monarchy’. The monarch remained very important but
was no longer able to insist on particular policies or actions if Parliament did
not agree. After William III, the ministers gradually became more important
than the monarch but this was not a democracy in the modern sense. The
number of people who had the right to vote for members of Parliament was
still very small. Only men who owned property of a certain value were able
to vote. No women at all had the vote. Some constituencies were controlled
by a single wealthy family. They were called the ‘pocket boroughs’. Other
constituencies had hardly any voters and were called ‘rotten boroughs’.

A growing population
This was a time when many people left Britain and Ireland to settle in new
colonies in America and elsewhere, but others came to live in Britain. The
first Jews to come to Britain since the Middle Ages settled in London in 1656.
Between 1680 and 1720 many refugees called Huguenots came from France.
They were Protestants and had been persecuted for their religion. Many
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 22

were educated and skilled and worked as scientists, in banking, or in weaving
or other crafts.

The Act or Treaty of Union in Scotland
William and Mary’s successor, Queen Anne, had no surviving children. This
created uncertainty over the succession in England, Wales and Ireland and in
Scotland. The Act of Union, known as the Treaty of Union in Scotland, was
therefore agreed in 1707, creating the Kingdom of Great Britain. Although
Scotland was no longer an independent country, it kept its own legal and
education systems and Presbyterian Church.

The Prime Minister
When Queen Anne died in 1714, Parliament chose a German, George I, to be
the next king, because he was Anne’s nearest Protestant relative. An
attempt by Scottish Jacobites to put James II’s son on the throne instead was
quickly defeated.
George I did not speak very good English and this
increased his need to rely on his ministers. The most important minister in
Parliament became known as the Prime Minister. The first man to be called
this was Sir Robert Walpole, who was Prime Minister from 1721 to 1742.

The rebellion of the clans
In 1745 there was another attempt to put a Stuart king back on the throne in
place of George I’s son, George II. Charles Edward Stuart (Bonnie Prince
Charlie), the grandson of James II, landed in Scotland. He was supported by
clansmen from the Scottish highlands and raised an army. Charles initially
had some successes but was defeated by George II’s army at the Battle of
Culloden in 1746. Charles escaped back to Europe.
The clans lost a lot of their power and influence after Culloden. Chieftains
became landlords if they had the favour of the English king, and clansmen
became tenants who had to pay for the land they used.
A process began which became known as the ‘Highland Clearances’. Many
Scottish landlords destroyed individual small farms (known as ‘crofts’) to
make space for large flocks of sheep and cattle. Evictions became very
common in the early 19th century. Many Scottish people left for North
America at this time.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 23

Robert Burns (1759-96)
Known in Scotland as ‘The Bard’, Robert Burns was a Scottish poet. He
wrote in the Scots language, English with some Scottish words and standard
English. He also revised a lot of the traditional folk songs by changing or
adding lyrics. Burns’ best-known work is probably the song Auld Lang Syne,
which is sung by people in the UK and other countries when they are
celebrating the New Year (or Hogmanay as it is called in Scotland).

The Enlightenment
During the 18th century, new ideas about politics, philosophy and science
were developed. This is often called ‘the Enlightenment’. Many of the great
thinkers of the Enlightenment were Scottish. Adam Smith developed ideas
about economics which are still referred to today. David Hume’s ideas about
human nature continue to influence philosophers. Scientific discoveries, such
as James Watt’s work on steam power, helped the progress of the Industrial
Revolution. One of the most important principles of the Enlightenment was
that everyone should have the right to their own political and religious beliefs
and that the state should not try to dictate to them. This continues to be an
important principle in the UK today.

The Industrial Revolution
Before the 18th century, agriculture was the biggest source of employment in
Britain. There were many cottage industries, where people worked from
home to produce goods such as cloth and lace.
The Industrial Revolution was the rapid development of industry in Britain in
the 18th and 19th centuries. Britain was the first country to industrialise on a
large scale. It happened because of the development of machinery and the
use of steam power. Agriculture and the manufacturing of goods became
mechanised. This made things more efficient and increased production. Coal
and other raw materials were needed to power the new factories.
Many
people moved from the countryside and started working in the mining and
manufacturing industries.
The development of the Bessemer process for the mass production of steel
led to the development of the shipbuilding industry and the railways.
Manufacturing jobs became the main source of employment in Britain.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 25

This was also a time of increased colonisation overseas. Captain James Cook
mapped the coast of Australia and a few colonies were established there.
Britain gained control over Canada, and the East India Company, originally
set up to trade, gained control of large parts of India. Colonies began to be
established in southern Africa.
Britain traded all over the world and began to import more goods. Sugar and
tobacco came from North America and the west Indies; textiles, tea and
spices came from India and the area that is today called Indonesia. Trading
and settlements overseas sometimes brought Britain into conflict with other
countries, particularly France, which was expanding and trading in a similar
way in many of the same areas of the world.
Sake Dean Mahomet (1759-1851)
Mahomet was born is 1759 and grew up in the Bengal region of India. He
served in the Bengal army and came to Britain in 1782. He then moved to
Ireland and eloped with an Irish girl called Jane Daly in 1786, returning to
England at the turn of the century. In 1810 he opened the Hindoostane
Coffee House in George Street, London. It was the first curry house to open
in Britain. Mahomet and his wife also introduced ‘shampooing’, the Indian
art of head massage, to Britain.

The slave trade
This commercial expansion and prosperity was sustained in part by the
booming slave trade. While slavery was illegal within Britain itself, by the
18th century it was a fully established overseas industry, dominated by
Britain and the American colonies.
Slaves came primarily from West Africa. Travelling on British ships in
horrible conditions, they were taken to America and the Caribbean, where
they were made to work on tobacco and sugar plantations. The living and
working conditions for slaves were very bad. Many slaves tried to escape
and others revolted against their owners in protest at their terrible
treatment.
There were, however people in Britain who opposed the slave trade. The
first formal anti-slavery groups were set up by the Quakers in the late 1700s,
and they petitioned Parliament to ban the practice. William Wilberforce, an
evangelical Christian and a member of Parliament, also played an important
part in changing the law.
Along with other abolitionists (people who
supported the abolition of slavery), he succeeded in turning public opinion
against the slave trade. In 1807, it became illegal to trade slaves in British
ships or from British ports, and in 1833 the Emancipation Act abolished
slavery throughout the British Empire. The Royal Navy stopped slave ships
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 26

from other countries, freed the slaves and punished the slave traders. After
1833, 2 million Indian and Chinese workers were employed to replace the
freed slaves. They worked on sugar plantations in the Caribbean, in mines in
South Africa, on railways in East Africa and in the army in Kenya.

The American War of Independence
By the 1760s, there were substantial British colonies in North America. The
colonies were wealthy and largely in control of their own affairs. Many of the
colonist families had originally gone to North America in order to have
religious freedom. They were well educated and interested in ideas of
liberty. The British government wanted to tax the colonies. The colonists
saw this as an attack on their freedom and said there should be ‘no taxation
without representation’ in the British Parliament.
Parliament tried to
compromise by repealing some of the taxes, but relationships between the
British government and the colonies continued to worsen. Fighting broke out
between the colonists and the British forces. In 1776, 13 American colonies
declared their independence, stating that people had a right to establish their
own governments. The colonists eventually defeated the British army and
Britain recognised the colonies’ independence in 1783.

War with France
During the 18th century, Britain fought a number of wars with France. In
1789, there was a revolution in France and the new French government soon
declared war on Britain.
Napoleon, who became Emperor of France,
continued the war. Britain’s navy fought against combined French and
Spanish fleets, winning the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805. Admiral Nelson was
in charge of the British fleet at Trafalgar and was killed in the battle.
Nelson’s Column in Trafalgar Square, London, is a monument to him. His
ship, HMS Victory, can be visited in Portsmouth. The British army also
fought against the French. In 1815, the French Wars ended with the defeat
of the Emperor Napoleon by the Duke of Wellington at the Battle of Waterloo.
Wellington was known as the Iron Duke and later became Prime Minister.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 27

The Battle of Trafalgar (21 October 1805) was a naval engagement fought by the British Royal
Navy against the combined fleets of the French Navy and Spanish Navy

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 30

The Victorian Age
In 1837, Queen Victoria became queen of the UK at the age of 18. She
reigned until 1901, almost 64 years. At the date of writing (2013) this is the
longest reign of any British monarch. Her reign is known as the Victorian
Age. It was a time when Britain increased in power and influence abroad.
Within the UK, the middle classes became increasingly significant and a
number of reformers led moves to improve conditions of life for the poor.

The British Empire
During the Victorian period, the British Empire grew to cover all of India,
Australia and large parts of Africa. It became the largest empire the world
has ever seen, with an estimated population of more than 400 million people.
Many people were encouraged to leave the UK to settle overseas. Between
1853 and 1913, as many as 13 million British citizens left the country.
People continued to come to Britain from other parts of the world. For
example, between 1870 and 1914, around 120, 000 Russian and Polish Jews
came to Britain to escape persecution. Many settled in London’s East End
and in Manchester and Leeds. People from the Empire, including India and
Africa, also came to Britain to live, work and study.

Trade and industry
Britain continued to be a great trading nation. The government began to
promote policies of free trade, abolishing a number of taxes on imported
goods. One example of this was the repealing of the Corn Laws in 1846.
These had prevented the import of cheap grain. The reforms helped the
development of the British industry, because raw materials could now be
imported cheaply.
Working conditions in factories gradually became better. In 1847, the
number of hours that women and children could work was limited by law to
10 hours per day. Better housing began to be built for workers.
Transport links also improved, enabling goods and people to move more
easily around the country. Just before Victoria came to the throne, the father
and son George and Robert Stephenson pioneered the railway engine and a
major expansion of the railways took place in the Victorian period. Railways
were built throughout the Empire. There were also great advances in other
areas, such as the building of bridges by engineers such as Isambard
Kingdom Brunel.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 32

The Crimean War
From 1853 to 1856, Britain fought with Turkey and France against Russia in
the Crimean War. It was the first war to be extensively covered by the
media through news stories and photographs. The conditions were very poor
and many soldiers died from illnesses they caught in the hospitals, rather
than from war wounds. Queen Victoria introduced the Victoria Cross medal
during this war. It honours acts of valour by soldiers.
Florence Nightingale (1820-1910)
Florence Nightingale was born in Italy to English parents. At the age of 31,
she trained as a nurse in Germany. In 1854, she went to Turkey and worked
in military hospitals, treating soldiers who were fighting in the Crimean War.
She and her fellow nurses improved the conditions in the hospital and
reduced the mortality rate. In 1860 she established the Nightingale Training
School for nurses at St Thomas’ Hospital in London. The school was the first
of its kind and still exists today, as do many of the practices that Florence
used. She is often regarded as the founder of modern nursing.

Ireland in the 19th century
Conditions in Ireland were not as good as in the rest of the UK. Two-thirds
of the population still depended on farming to make their living, often on
very small plots of land. In the middle of the century the potato crop failed,
and Ireland suffered a famine. A million people died from disease and
starvation. Another million and a half left Ireland. Some emigrated to the
United States and others came to England. By 1861 there were large
populations of Irish people in cities such as Liverpool, London, Manchester
and Glasgow.
The Irish Nationalist movement had grown strongly through the 19th century.
Some, such as the Fenians, favoured complete independence. Others, such
as Charles Stuart Parnell, advocated ‘Home Rule’, in which Ireland would
remain in the UK but have its own parliament.

The right to vote
As the middle classes in the wealthy industrial towns and cities grew in
influence, they began to demand more political power. The Reform Act of
1832 had greatly increased the number of people with the right to vote. The
act also abolished the old pocket and rotten boroughs and more
parliamentary seats were given to the towns and cities. There was a
permanent shift of political power from the countryside to the towns but
voting was still based on ownership of the property. This meant that
members of the working class were still unable to vote.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 33

A movement began to demand the vote for the working classes and other
people without property.
Campaigners, called the Chartists, presented
petitions to Parliament. At first they seemed to be unsuccessful, but in 1867
there was another Reform Act. This created many more urban seats in
Parliament and reduced the amount of property that people needed to have
before they could vote. However, the majority of men still did not have the
right to vote and no women could vote.
Politicians realised that the increased number of voters meant that they
needed to persuade people to vote for them if they were to be sure of being
elected to Parliament. The political parties began to create organisations to
reach out to ordinary voters. Universal suffrage (the right of every adult,
male or female, to vote) followed in the next century.
In common with the rest of Europe, women in 19th century Britain had fewer
rights than men. Until 1870, when a woman got married, her earnings,
property and money automatically belonged to her husband.
Acts of
Parliament in 1870 and 1882 gave wives the right to keep their own earnings
and property. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, an increasing number
of women campaigned and demonstrated for greater rights and, in particular,
the right to vote. They formed the women’s suffrage movement and became
known as the ‘suffragettes’.
Emmeline Pankhurst (1858-1928)
Emmeline Pankhurst was born in Manchester in 1858. She set up the
women’s Franchise League in 1889, which fought to get the vote in local
elections for married women. In 1903 she helped found the Women’s Social
and Political Union (WSPU). This was the first group whose members were
called ‘suffragettes’. The group used civil disobedience as part of their
protest to gain the vote for women. They chained themselves to railings,
smashed windows and committed arson.
Many of the women, including
Emmeline, went on a hunger strike. In 1918, women over the age of 30
were given voting rights and the right to stand for Parliament, partly in
recognition of the contribution women made to the war effort during the First
World War. Shortly before Emmeline’s death in 1928, women were given the
right to vote at the age of 21, the same as men.

The future of the Empire
Although the British Empire continued to grow until the 1920s, there was
already discussion in the late 19th century about its future direction.
Supporters of expansion believed that the Empire benefited Britain through
increased trade and commerce. Others thought the Empire had become
over-expanded and that the frequent conflicts in many parts of the Empire,
such as India’s north-west frontier or southern Africa, were a drain on
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 34

resources. Yet the great majority of British people believed in the Empire as
a force for good in the world.
The Boer War of 1899 to 1902 made the discussions about the future of the
Empire more urgent. The British went to war in South Africa with settlers
from the Netherlands called the Boers. The Boers fought fiercely and the war
went on for over three years. Many died in the fighting and many more from
disease. There was some public sympathy for the Boers and people began to
question whether the Empire could continue. As different parts of the Empire
developed, they won greater freedom and autonomy from Britain.
Eventually, by the second half of the 20th century, there was, for the most
part, an orderly transition from Empire to Commonwealth, with countries
being granted their independence.
Rudyard Kipling (1865-1936)
Rudyard Kipling was born in India in 1865 and later lived in India, the UK and
the USA. He wrote books and poems set in both India and the UK. His
poems and novels reflected the idea that the British Empire was a force for
good. Kipling was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1907. His books
include the Just So Stories and The Jungle Book, which continue to be
popular today. His poem If has often been voted among the UK’s favourite
poems. It begins with these words:
‘If you can keep your head when all about you
Are losing theirs and blaming it on you;
If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,
But make allowance for their doubting too;
If you can wait and not be tired by waiting,
Or being lied about, don’t deal in lies,
Or being hated, don’t give way to hating,
And yet don’t look too good, nor talk too wise’
(If, Rudyard Kipling)

Check that you understand
• The change in the balance of power between Parliament and the monarchy
• When and why Scotland joined England and Wales to become Great
Britain
• The reasons for a rebellion in Scotland led by Bonnie Prince Charlie
• The ideas of the Enlightenment
• The importance of the Industrial Revolution and development of industry
• The slave trade and when it was abolished
• The growth of the British Empire
• How democracy developed during this period
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 35

The 20th century
The First World War
The early 20th century was a time of optimism in Britain. The nation, with its
expansive Empire, well-admired navy, thriving industry and strong political
institutions, was what is now known as a global ‘superpower’. It was also a
time of social progress. Financial help for the unemployed, old-age pensions
and free school meals were just a few of the important measures introduced.
Various laws were passed to improve safety in the workplace; town planning
rules were tightened to prevent the further development of slums; and better
support was given to mothers and their children after divorce or separation.
Local government became more democratic and a salary for members of
Parliament (MPs) was introduced for the first time, making it easier for more
people to take part in public life.
This era of optimism and progress was cut short when war broke out
between several European nations. On 28 June 1914, Archduke Franz
Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated. This set off a chain of events leading
to the First World War (1914-18). But while the assassination provided the
trigger for war, other factors – such as a growing sense of nationalism in
many European states; increasing militarism; imperialism; and the division of
the major European powers into two camps – all set the conditions for war.
The conflict was centred in Europe, but it was a global war involving nations
from around the world. Britain was part of the Allied Powers, which included
(amongst others) France, Russia, Japan, Belgium, Serbia – and later, Greece,
Italy, Romania and the United States. The whole of the British Empire was
involved in the conflict – for example, more than a million Indians fought on
behalf of Britain in lots of different countries, and around 40, 000 were killed.
Men from the West Indies, Africa, Australia, New Zealand and Canada also
fought with the British. The Allies fought against the Central Powers – mainly
Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Ottoman Empire and later
Bulgaria.
Millions of people were killed or wounded, with more than 2
million British casualties. One battle, the British attack of the Somme in July
1916, resulted in about 60,000 British casualties on the first day alone.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 36

Soldiers fighting in the trenches during the First World War

The First World War ended at 11.00 am on 11th November 1918 with victory
for Britain and its allies.

The partition of Ireland
In 1913, the British government promised ‘Home Rule’ for Ireland. The
proposal was to have a self-governing Ireland with its own parliament but
still part of the UK. A Home Rule Bill was introduced in Parliament. It was
opposed by the Protestants in the north of Ireland, who threatened to resist
Home Rule by force.
The outbreak of the First World War led the British government to postpone
any changes in Ireland. Irish Nationalists were not willing to wait and in
1916 there was an uprising (the Easter Rising) against the British in Dublin.
The leaders of the uprising were executed under military law. A guerrilla war
against the British army and the police in Ireland followed. In 1921 a peace
treaty was signed and in 1922 Ireland became two countries. The six
countries in the north which were mainly Protestant remained part of the UK
under the name Northern Ireland. The rest of Ireland became the Irish Free
State. It had its own government and became a republic in 1949.
There were people in both parts of Ireland who disagree with the split
between the North and the South.
They still wanted Ireland to be one
independent country.
Years of disagreement led to a terror campaign in
Northern Ireland and elsewhere. The conflict between those wishing for full
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 37

Irish independence and those wishing to remain loyal to the British
government is often referred to as ‘the Troubles’.

The inter-war period
In the 1920s, many people’s living conditions got better. There were
improvements in public housing and new homes were built in many towns
and cities. However, in 1929, the world entered the ‘Great Depression’ and
some parts of the UK suffered mass unemployment. The effects of the
depression of the 1930s were felt differently in different parts of the UK. The
traditional heavy industries such as shipbuilding were badly affected but new
industries – including the automobile and aviation industries – developed. As
prices generally fell, those in work had more money to spend. Car ownership
doubled from 1 million to 2 million between 1930 and 1939. In addition,
many new houses were built. It was also a time of cultural blossoming, with
writers such as Graham Greene and Evelyn Waugh prominent.
The
economist John Maynard Keynes published influential new theories of
economics. The BBC started radio broadcasts in 1922 and began the world’s
first regular television service in 1936.

The Second World War
Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany in 1933. He believed that the
conditions imposed on Germany by the Allies after the First World War were
unfair; he also wanted to conquer more land for the German people. He set
about renegotiating treaties, building up arms, and testing Germany’s
military strength in nearby countries. The British government tried to avoid
another war. However, when Hitler invaded Poland in 1939, Britain and
France declared war in order to stop his aggression.
The war was initially fought between the Axis powers (fascist Germany and
Italy and the Empire of Japan) and the Allies. The main countries on the
allied side were the UK, France, Poland, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and
the Union of South Africa.
Having occupied Austria and invaded Czechoslovakia, Hitler followed his
invasion of Poland by taking control of Belgium and the Netherlands. Then,
in 1940, German forces defeated allied troops and advanced through France.
At this time of national crisis, Winston Churchill became Prime Minister and
Britain’s war leader.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 39

As France fell, the British decided to evacuate British and French solders from
France in a huge naval operation. Many civilian volunteers in small pleasure
and fishing boats from Britain helped the Navy to rescue more than 300,000
men from the beaches around Dunkirk. Although many lives and a lot of
equipment were lost, the evacuation was a success and meant that Britain
was better able to continue the fight against the Germans. The evacuation
gave rise to the phrase ‘the Dunkirk spirit’.
From the end of June 1940 until the German invasion of the Soviet Union in
June 1941, Britain and the Empire stood almost alone against Nazi Germany.
Hitler wanted to invade Britain, but before sending in troops, Germany
needed to control the air campaign against Britain, but the British resisted
with their fighter planes and eventually won the crucial aerial battle against
the Germans, called ‘the Battle of Britain’, in the summer of 1940. The most
important planes used by the Royal Air Force in the Battle of Britain were the
Spitfire and the Hurricane – which were designed and built in Britain.
Despite this crucial victory, the German air force was able to continue
bombing London and other British cities at night-time. This was called the
Blitz. Coventry was almost totally destroyed and a great deal of damage was
done in other cities, especially in the East End of London. Despite the
destruction, there was a strong national spirit of resistance in the UK. The
phrase ‘the Blitz spirit’ is still used today to describe Britons pulling together
in the face of adversity.
At the same time as defending Britain, the British military was fighting the
Axis on many other fronts. In Singapore, the Japanese defeated the British
and then occupied Burma, threatening India. The United States entered the
war when the Japanese bombed its naval base at Pearl Harbor in December
1941.
That same year, Hitler attempted the largest invasion in history by attacking
the Soviet Union. It was a fierce conflict, with huge losses on both sides.
German forces were ultimately repelled by the Soviets, and the damage they
sustained proved to be a pivotal point in the war.
The allied forces gradually gained the upper hand, winning significant
victories in North Africa and Italy. German losses in the Soviet Union,
combined with the support of the Americans, meant that the Allies were
eventually strong enough to attack Hitler’s forces in Western Europe. On 6
June 1944, allied forces landed in Normandy (this event is often referred to
as ‘D-Day’). Following victory on the beaches of Normandy, the allied forces
pressed on through France and eventually into Germany.
The Allies
comprehensively defeated Germany in May 1945.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 40

The Royal Air Force helped to defend Britain in the Second World War

The war against Japan ended in August 1945 when the United States
dropped its newly developed atom bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki. Scientists led by Ernest Rutherford, working at Manchester
and then Cambridge University, were the first to ‘split the atom’ and took
part in the Manhattan Project in the United States, which developed the
atomic bomb. The war was finally over.
Alexander Fleming (1881-1955)
Born in Scotland, Fleming moved to London as a teenager and later qualified
as a doctor. He was researching influenza (the ‘flu’) in 1928 when he
discovered penicillin. This was then further developed into a usable drug by
the scientists Howard Florey and Ernst Chain. By the 1940s it was in mass
production. Fleming won the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1945. Penicillin is
still used to treat bacterial infections today.
Check that you understand
• What happened during the First World War
• The partition of Ireland and the establishment of the UK as it is today
• The events of the Second World War
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 41

Britain since 1945
The welfare state
Although the UK had won the war, the country was exhausted economically
and the people wanted change. During the war, there had been significant
reforms to the educational system and people now looked for wider social
reforms.
In 1945 the British people elected a Labour government. The new Prime
Minister was Clement Attlee, who promised to introduce the welfare state
outlined in the Beveridge Report. In 1948, Aneurin (Nye) Bevan, the Minister
for Health, led the establishment of the National Health Service (NHS), which
guaranteed a minimum standard of health care for all, free at the point of
use. A national system of benefits was also introduced to provide ‘social
security’, so that the population would be protected from the ‘cradle to the
grave’.
The government took into public ownership (nationalised) the
railways, coal mines and gas, water and electricity supplies.
Another aspect of change was self-government for former colonies. In 1947,
independence was granted to nine countries, including India, Pakistan and
Ceylon (now Sri Lanka). Other colonies in Africa, the Caribbean and the
Pacific achieved independence over the next 20 years.
The UK developed its own atomic bomb and joined the new North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), an alliance of nations set up to resist the
perceived threat of invasion by the Soviet Union and it allies.
Britain had a Conservative government from 1951 to 1964. The 1950s were
a period of economic recovery after the war and increasing prosperity for
working people. The Prime Minister of the day, Harold Macmillan, was
famous for his ‘wind of change’ speech about decolonisation and
independence for the countries of the Empire.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 42

Clement Attlee (1883-1967)
Clement Attlee was born in London in 1883. His father was a solicitor and,
after studying at Oxford University, Attlee became a barrister. He gave this
up to do social work in East London and eventually became a Labour MP. He
was Winston Churchill’s Deputy Prime Minister in the wartime coalition
government and became Prime Minister after the Labour Party won the 1945
election. He was Prime Minister from 1945 to 1951 and led the Labour Party
for 20 years. Attlee’s government undertook the nationalisation of major
industries (like coal and steel), created the National Health Service and
implemented many of Beveridge’s plans for a stronger welfare state. Attlee
also introduced measures to improve the conditions of workers.

William Beveridge (1879-1963)
William Beveridge (later Lord Beveridge) was a British economist and
reformer. He served briefly as a Liberal MP and was subsequently the leader
of the Liberals in the House of Lords but is best known for the 1942 report
Social Insurance and Allied Services (known as the Beveridge Report). The
report was commissioned by the wartime government in 1941.
It
recommended that the government should find ways of fighting the five
‘Giant Evils’ of Want, Disease, Ignorance, Squalor and Idleness and provided
the basis of the modern welfare state.

R A Butler (1902-82)
Richard Austen Butler (later Lord Butler) was born in 1902. He became a
Conservative MP in 1923 and held several positions before becoming
responsible for education in 1941. In this role, he oversaw the introduction
of the Education Act 1944 (often called ‘The Butler Act’), which introduced
free secondary education in England and Wales. The education system has
changed significantly since the Act was introduced, but the division between
primary and secondary schools that it enforced still remains in most areas of
Britain.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 43

Dylan Thomas (1914-53)
Dylan Thomas was a Welsh poet and writer. He often read and performed
his work in public, including for the BBC. His most well-known works include
the radio play Under Milk Wood, first performed after his death in 1954, and
the poem Do Not Go Gentle into That Good Night, which he wrote for his
dying father in 1952. He died at the age of 39 in New York. There are
several memorials to him in his birthplace, Swansea, including a statue and
the Dylan Thomas Centre.

Migration in Post-war Britain
Rebuilding Britain after the Second World War was a huge task. There were
labour shortages and the British government encouraged workers from
Ireland and other parts of Europe to come to the UK and help with the
reconstruction. In 1948, people from the West Indies were also invited to
come and work.
During the 1950s, there was still a shortage of labour in the UK. Further
immigration was therefore encouraged for economic reasons, and many
industries advertised for workers from overseas. For example, centres were
set up in the West Indies to recruit people to drive buses. Textile and
engineering firms from the north of England and the Midlands sent agents to
India and Pakistan to find workers. For about 25 years, people from the
West Indies, India, Pakistan and (later) Bangladesh travelled to work and
settle in Britain.

Social change in the 1960s
The decade of the 1960s was a period of significant social change. It was
known as the ‘swinging sixties’. There was growth in British fashion, cinema
and popular music. Two well-known pop music groups at the time were The
Beatles and The Rolling Stones. People started to become better off and
many bought cars and other consumer goods.
It was also a time when social laws were liberalised, for example in relation
to divorce and to abortion in England, Wales and Scotland. The position of
women in the workplace also improved. It was quite common at the time for
employers to ask women to leave their jobs when they got married, but
Parliament passed new laws giving women the right to equal pay and made it
illegal for employers to discriminate against women because of their gender.
The 1960s was also a time of technological progress. Britain and France
developed the world’s only supersonic commercial airliner, Concorde. New
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 44

styles of architecture, including high-rise buildings and the use of concrete
and steel, became common.
The number of people migrating from the West Indies, India, Pakistan and
what is now Bangladesh fell in the late 1960s because the government
passed new laws to restrict immigration to Britain.
Immigrants were
required to have a strong connection to Britain through birth or ancestry.
Even so, during the early 1970s, Britain admitted 28,000 people of Indian
origin who had been forced to leave Uganda.
Some great British inventions of the 20th century
Britain has given the world some wonderful inventions.
Examples from the 20th century include:
The television was developed by Scotsman John Logie Baird (1888-1946) in
the 1920s. In 1932 he made the first television broadcast between London
and Glasgow.
Radar was developed by Scotsman Sir Robert Watson-Watt (1892-1973),
who proposed that enemy aircraft could be detected by radio waves. The
first successful radar test took place in 1935.
Working with radar led Sir Bernard Lovell (1913-2012) to make new
discoveries in astronomy. The radio telescope he built at Jodrell Bank in
Cheshire was for many years the biggest in the world and continues to
operate today.
A Turing machine is a theoretical mathematical device invented by Alan
Turing (1912-54), a British mathematician, in the 1930s. The theory was
influential in the development of computer science and the modern-day
computer.
The Scottish physician and researcher John Macleod (1876-1935) was the codiscoverer of insulin, used to treat diabetes.
The structure of the DNA molecule was discovered in 1953 through work
at British universities in London and Cambridge. This discovery contributed
to many scientific advances, particularly in medicine and fighting crime.
Francis Crick (1916-2004), one of those awarded the Nobel Prize for this
discovery, was British.
The jet engine was developed in Britain in the 1930s by Sir Frank Whittle
(1907-96), a British Royal Air Force engineer officer.
Sir Christopher Cockrell
hovercraft in the 1950s.

(1910-99),

a

British

inventor,

invented

the

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 45

Britain and France developed Concorde, the world’s only supersonic
passenger aircraft. It first flew in 1969 and began carrying passengers in
1976. Concorde was retired from service in 2003.
The Harrier jump jet, an aircraft capable of taking off vertically, was also
designed and developed in the UK.
In the 1960s, James Goodfellow (1937-) invented the cash-dispensing
ATM (automatic teller machine) or ‘cashpoint’. The first of these was put
into use by Barclays Bank in Enfield, north London in 1967.
IVF (in-vitro fertilisation) therapy for the treatment of infertility was
pioneered in Britain by physiologist Sir Robert Edwards (1925-) and
gynaecologist Patrick Steptoe (1913-88). The world’s first ‘test-tube baby’
was born in Oldham, Lancashire in 1978.
In 1996, two British scientists, Sir Ian Wilmot (1944-) and Keith Campbell
(1954-2012), led a team which was the first to succeed in cloning a
mammal, Dolly the sheep. This has led to further research into the possible
use of cloning to preserve endangered species and for medical purposes.
Sir Peter Mansfield (1933-), a British scientist, is the co-inventor of the MRI
(magnetic resonance imaging) scanner.
This enables doctors and
researchers to obtain exact and non-invasive images of human internal
organs and has revolutionised diagnostic medicine.
The inventor of the World Wide Web, Sir Tim Berners-Lee (1955-), is
British. Information was successfully transferred via the web for the first
time on 25 December 1990.

Problem in the economy in the 1970s
In the late 1970s, the post-war economic boom came to an end. Prices of
goods and raw materials began to rise sharply and the exchange rate
between the pound and other currencies was unstable. This caused problems
with the ‘balance of payments’: imports of goods were valued at more than
the price paid for exports.
Many industries and services were affected by strikes and this caused
problems between the trade unions and the government. People began to
argue that the unions were too powerful and that their activities were
harming the UK.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 46

The 1970s were also a time of serious unrest in Northern Ireland. In 1972,
the Northern Ireland Parliament was suspended and Northern Ireland was
directly ruled by the UK government. Some 3,000 people lost their lives in
the decades after 1969 in the violence of Northern Ireland.
Mary Peters (1939-)
Born in Manchester, Mary Peters moved to Northern Ireland as a child. She
was a talented athlete who won an Olympic gold medal in the pentathlon in
1972. After this, she raised money for local athletics and became the team
manager for the women’s British Olympic team. She continues to promote
sport and tourism in Northern Ireland and was made a Dame of the British
Empire in 2000 in recognition of her work.

Europe and the Common Market
West Germany, France, Belgium, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands
formed the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1957. At first the UK
did not wish to join the EEC but it eventually did so in 1973. The UK is a full
member of the European Union but does not use the Euro currency.

Conservative government from 1979 to 1997
Margaret Thatcher, Britain’s first woman Prime Minister, led the Conservative
government from 1979 to 1990. The government made structural changes
to the economy through the privatisation of nationalised industries and
imposed legal controls on trade union powers. Deregulation saw a great
increase in the role of the City of London as an international centre for
investments, insurance and other financial services. Traditional industries,
such as shipbuilding and coal mining, declined. In 1982, Argentina invaded
the Falkland Islands, a British overseas territory in the South Atlantic. A
naval taskforce was sent from the UK and military action led to the recovery
of the islands.
John Major was Prime Minister after Mrs Thatcher, and helped establish the
Northern Ireland peace process.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 3: A Long and Illustrious History - Page 48

Ireland have decommissioned their arms and are inactive.
took over as Prime Minister in 2007.

Gordon Brown

Conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq
Throughout the 1990s, Britain played a leading role in coalition forces
involved in the liberation of Kuwait, following the Iraqi invasion in 1990, and
the conflict in the former Republic of Yugoslavia. Since 2000, British armed
forces have been engaged in the global fight against international terrorism
and against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including
operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. British combat troops left Iraq in 2009.
The UK now operates in Afghanistan as part of the United Nations (UN)
mandated 50-nation International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) coalition
and at the invitation of the Afghan government. ISAF is working to ensure
that Afghan territory can never again be used as a safe haven for
international terrorism, where groups such as Al Qa’ida could plan attacks on
the international community. As part of this, ISAF is building up the Afghan
National Security Forces and is helping to create a secure environment in
which governance and development can be extended. International forces
are gradually handing over responsibility for security to the Afghans, who will
have full security responsibility in all provinces by the end of 2014.

Coalition government 2010 onwards
In May 2010, and for the first time in the UK since February 1974, no political
party won an overall majority in the General Election. The Conservative and
Liberal Democrat parties formed a coalition and the leader of the
Conservative Party, David Cameron, became Prime Minister.

Check that you understand
• The establishment of the welfare state
• How life in Britain changed in the 1960s and 1970s
• British inventions of the 20th century (you do not need to remember dates
of births and deaths)
• Events since 1979

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

