UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 1: The Values and Principles of the UK - Page 1

Chapter 1 - The Values and
Principles of the UK

Britain is a fantastic place to live: a modern, thriving society with a long and
illustrious history. Our people have been at the heart of the world’s political,
scientific, industrial and cultural development. We are proud of our record of
welcoming new migrants who will add to the diversity and dynamism of our
national life.
Applying to become a permanent resident or citizen of the UK is an important
decision and commitment. You will be agreeing to accept the responsibilities
which go with permanent residence and to respect the laws, values and
traditions of the UK. Good citizens are an asset to the UK. We welcome
those seeking to make a positive contribution to our society.
Passing the Life in the UK test is part of demonstrating that you are ready to
become a permanent migrant to the UK. This handbook is designed to
support you in your preparation. It will help you to integrate into society and
play a full role in your local community. It will also help ensure that you a
have a broad general knowledge of the culture, laws and history of the UK.

The values and principles of the UK
British society is founded on fundamental values and principles which all
those living in the UK should respect and support. These values are reflected
in the responsibilities, rights and privileges of being a British citizen or
permanent resident of the UK. They are based on history and traditions and
are protected by law, customs and expectations. There is no place in British
society for extremism or intolerance.
The fundamental principles of British life include:
• Democracy
• The rule of law
• Individual liberty
• Tolerance of those with different faiths and beliefs
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 1: The Values and Principles of the UK - Page 2

• Participation in community life.
As part of the citizenship ceremony, new citizens pledge to uphold these
values. The pledge is:
‘I will give my loyalty to the United Kingdom and respect its rights and
freedoms. I will uphold its democratic values. I will observe its laws
faithfully and fulfil my duties and obligations as a British citizen.’
Flowing from the fundamental principles are responsibilities and freedoms
which are shared by all those living in the UK and which we expect all
residents to respect.
If you wish to be a permanent resident or citizen of the UK, you should:
• Respect and obey the law
• Respect the rights of others, including their right to their own opinions
• Treat others with fairness
• Look after yourself and your family
• Look after the area in which you live and the environment.
In return, the UK offers:
• Freedom of belief and religion
• Freedom of speech
• Freedom from unfair discrimination
• A right to a fair trial
• A right to join in the election of a government.

Becoming a permanent resident
To apply to become a permanent resident or citizen of the UK, you will need
to:
• Speak and read English
• Have a good understanding of life in the UK.
This means you will need to:
• Pass the Life in the UK test
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 1: The Values and Principles of the UK - Page 3

AND
• Produce acceptable evidence of speaking and listening skills in English at
B1 of the Common European Framework of Reference. This is equivalent to
ESOL Entry Level 3. There is a wide range of qualifications or ways that may
be used to demonstrate this. Some of these test speaking and listening skills
only. Others also test reading and writing skills. You will be able to choose a
qualification that suits your requirements. For further details on how to
demonstrate evidence of the required level of speaking and listening skills in
English, please visit the Home Office website
It is possible that the requirements may change in the future. You should
check the information on the Home Office website for current requirements
before applying for settlement or citizenship.

Taking the Life in the UK Test
This handbook will help prepare you for taking the Life in the UK test. The
test consists of 24 questions about important aspects of life in the UK.
Questions are based on ALL parts of the handbook, but you will not need to
remember dates of birth or death. The 24 questions will be different for each
person taking the test at that test session.
The Life in the UK test is usually taken in English, although special
arrangements can be made if you wish to take it in Welsh or Scottish Gaelic.
You can only take the test at a registered and approved Life in the UK test
centre. There are about 60 test centres around the UK. You can only book
your test online, at www.lifeintheuktest.gov.uk. You should not take your
test at any other establishment as the UK Border Agency will only accept
certificates from registered test centres. If you live on the Isle of Man or in
the Channel Islands, there are different arrangements for taking the Life in
the UK test.
When booking your test, read the instructions carefully. Make sure you enter
your details correctly. You will need to take some identification and proof of
your address with you to the test. If you don’t take these, you will not be
able to take your test.

How to use this handbook
Everything that you will need to know to pass the Life in the UK test is
included in this handbook. The questions will be based on the whole book,
including this introduction, so make sure you study the entire book
thoroughly. The handbook has been written to ensure that anyone who can
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

UKCitizenshipSupport.com

Chapter 1: The Values and Principles of the UK - Page 4

read English at ESOL Entry Level 3 or above should have no difficulty with
the language.
The glossary at the back of the handbook contains some key words and
phrases, which you might find helpful.
The ‘Check that you understand’ boxes are for guidance. They will help you
to identify particular things that you should understand. Just knowing the
things highlighted in these boxes will not be enough to pass the test. You
need to make sure that you understand everything in the book, so please
read the information carefully.

Where to find more information
You can find out more information from the following places:
• The Home Office website for information about the application process and
the forms you will need to complete
• The Life in the UK test website (www.lifeintheuktest.gov.uk) for more
information about the test and how to book a place to take one
• Gov.uk (www.gov.uk) for information about ESOL courses and how to find
one in your area.

Check that you understand
• The origin of the values underlying British society
• The fundamental principles of British life
• The responsibilities and freedoms which come with permanent residence
• The process of becoming a permanent resident or citizen

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

