Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 1
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

Chapter 5 - The UK
Government, the Law and Your
Role

Chapter contents
• The development of British democracy
• The British constitution
• The government
• The UK and international institutions
• Respecting the law
• Fundamental principles
• Your role in the community

The UK is a parliamentary democracy with the monarch as head of state.
This section will tell you about the different institutions which make up this
democratic system and explain how you can play a part in the democratic
process.

The development of British democracy
Democracy is a system of government where the whole adult population gets
a say. This might be by direct voting or by choosing representatives to make
decisions on their behalf.
At the turn of the 19th century, Britain was not a democracy as we know it
today. Although there were elections to select members of Parliament (MPs),
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 2
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
only a small group of people could vote. They were men who were over 21
years of age and who owned a certain amount of property.
The franchise (that is the number of people who had the right to vote) grew
over the course of the 19th century and political parties began to involve
ordinary men and women as members.
In the 1830s and 1840s, a group called the Chartists campaigned for reform.
They wanted six changes:
• for every man to have the vote
• elections every year
• for all regions to be equal in the electoral system
• secret ballots
• for any man to be able to stand as an MP
• for MPs to be paid
At the time, the campaign was generally seen as failure. However, by 1918
most of these reforms had been adopted. The voting franchise was also
extended to women over 30, and then in 1928 to men and women over 21.
In 1969, the voting age was reduced to 18 for men and women.

The British constitution
A constitution is a set of principles by which a country is governed. It
includes all of the institutions that are responsible for running the country
and how their power is kept in check. The constitution also includes laws and
conventions. The British constitution is not written down in any single
document, and therefore it is described as ‘unwritten’.
This is mainly
because the UK, unlike America or France, has never had a revolution which
led permanently to a totally new system of government. Our most important
institutions have developed over hundreds of years. Some people believe
that there should be a single document, but others believe an unwritten
constitution allows for more flexibility and better government.

Constitutional institutions
In the UK, there are several different parts of government. The main ones
are:
• the monarchy
• Parliament (the House of Commons and the House of Lords)
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 4
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
makes state visits overseas in
relationships with other counties.

support

of

diplomatic

and

economic

The Queen has an important role in providing stability and continuity. While
governments and Prime Ministers change regularly, the Queen continues as
head of state. She provides a focus for national identity and pride, which
was demonstrated through the celebrations of her Jubilee.
The National Anthem
The National Anthem of the UK is ‘God Save the Queen’. It is played at
important national occasions and at events attended by the Queen or the
Royal Family. The first verse is:
‘God save our gracious Queen!
Long live our noble Queen!
God save the Queen!
Send her victorious,
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us,
God save the Queen!’
New citizens swear or affirm loyalty to the Queen as part of the citizenship
ceremony.
Oath of allegiance
I (name) swear by Almighty God that on becoming a British citizen, I will be
faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second,
her Heirs and Successors, according to law.
Affirmation of allegiance
I (name) do solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm that on
becoming a British citizen, I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second, her Heirs and Successors, according to
law.

System of government
The system of government in the UK is a parliamentary democracy. The UK
is divided into parliamentary constituencies. Voters in each constituency
elect their Member of Parliament (MP) in a General Election. All of the
elected MPs form the House of Commons. Most MPs belong to a political
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 5
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
party, and the party with the majority of MPs forms the government. If one
party does not get a majority, two parties can join together to form a
coalition.

The House of Parliament, one of the centres of political life in the UK and a World Heritage Site

The House of Commons
The House of Commons is regarded as the more important of the two
chambers in Parliament because its members are democratically elected.
The Prime Minister and almost all the members of the cabinet are members
of the House of Commons (MPs). Each MP represents a parliamentary
constituency,
which
is
a
small
area
of
the
country.
MPs have a number of different responsibilities. They:
• Represent everyone in their constituency
• Help to create new laws
• Scrutinize and comment on what the government is doing
• Debate important national issues

The House of Lords
Members of the House of Lords, known as peers, are not elected by the
people and do not represent a constituency. The role and membership of the
House of Lords has changed over the last 50 years.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 6
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
Until 1958, all peers were:
• ‘hereditary’, which means they inherited their title, or
• senior judges, or
• bishops of the Church of England.
Since 1958, the Prime Minister has had the power to nominate peers just for
their own lifetime. These are called life peers. They have usually had an
important career in politics, business, law or another profession. Life peers
are appointed by the monarch on the advice of the Prime Minister. They also
include people nominated by the leaders of the other main political parties or
by an independent Appointments Commission for non-party peers.
Since 1999, hereditary peers have lost the automatic right to attend the
House of Lords. They now elect a few of their number to represent them in
the House of Lords.
The House of Lords is normally more independent of the government than
the House of Commons. It can suggest amendments or propose new laws,
which are then discussed by MPs. The House of Lords checks laws that have
been passed by the House of Commons to ensure they are fit for purpose. It
also holds the government to account to make sure that it is working in the
best interests of the people. There are peers who are specialists in particular
areas, and their knowledge is useful in making and checking laws. The
House of Commons has powers to overrule the House of Lords, but these are
not used often.

The Speaker
Debates in the House of Commons are chaired by the Speaker. This person
is the chief officer of the House of Commons. The Speaker is neutral and
does not represent a political party, even though he or she is an MP,
represents a constituency and deals with the constituents’ problems like any
other MP. The Speaker is chosen by other MPs in a secret ballot.
The Speaker keeps order during political debates to make sure the rules are
followed. This includes making sure the opposition (see the section on ‘The
government’) has a guaranteed amount of time to debate issues which it
chooses. The Speaker also represents Parliament on ceremonial occasions.

Elections
UK elections
MPs are elected at a General Election, which is held at least every five years.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 7
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
If an MP dies or resigns, there will be a fresh election, called a by-election, in
his or her constituency.
MPs are elected through a system called ‘first past the post’. In each
constituency, the candidate who gets the most votes is elected.
The
government is usually formed by the party that wins the majority of
constituencies. If no party wins a majority, two parties may join together to
form a coalition.
European parliamentary elections
Elections for the European Parliament are also held every five years. Elected
members are called members of the European Parliament (MEPs). Elections
to the European Parliament use a system of proportional representation,
where seats are allocated to each party in proportion to the total number of
votes it has won.

Contacting elected members
All elected members have a duty to serve and represent their constituents.
You can get contact details for all your representatives and their parties from
your local library and from www.parliament.uk. MPs, Assembly members,
members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs) and MEPs are also listed in The
Phone Book, published by BT, and in Yellow Pages.
You can contact MPs by letter or telephone at their constituency office, or at
their office in the House of Commons: The House of Commons, Westminster,
London SW1A OAA, telephone 0207729 3000. In addition, many MPs,
Assembly members, MSPs and MEPs hold regular local ‘surgeries’, where
constituents can go in person to talk about issues that are of concern to
them. These surgeries are often advertised in the local newspaper.
Check that you understand
• How democracy has developed in the UK
• What a constitution is and how the UK’s constitution is different from
those of most other countries
• The role of the monarch
• The role of the House of Commons and House of Lords
• What the Speaker does
• How the UK elects MPs and MEPs

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 8
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

The government
The Prime Minister
The Prime Minister (PM) is the leader of the political party in power. He or
she appoints the members of the cabinet (see below) and has control over
many important public appointments. The official home of the Prime Minister
is 10 Downing Street, in central London, near the Houses of Parliament. He
or she also has a country house outside London called Chequers.
The Prime Minister can be changed if the MPs in the governing party decide
to do so, or if he or she wishes to resign. The Prime Minister usually resigns
if his or her party loses a General Election.

The cabinet
The Prime Minister appoints about 20 senior MPs to become ministers in
charge of departments. These include:
• Chancellor of the Exchequer – responsible for the economy
• Home Secretary – responsible for crime, policing and immigration
• Foreign Secretary - responsible for managing relationships with foreign
countries
• Other ministers (called ‘Secretaries of State’) responsible for subjects such
as education, health and defence.
These ministers form the cabinet, a committee which usually meets weekly
and makes important decisions about government policy. Many of the
decisions have to be debated or approved by Parliament.
Each department also has a number of other ministers, called Ministers of
State and Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State, who take charge of
particular areas of the department’s work.

The opposition
The second-largest party in the House of Commons is called the opposition.
The leader of the opposition usually becomes Prime Minister if his of her
party wins the next General Election.
The leader of the opposition leads his or her party in pointing out what they
see as the government’s failures and weaknesses.
One important
opportunity to do this is at Prime Minister’s Questions, which takes place
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 9
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
every week while Parliament is sitting. The leader of the opposition also
appoints senior opposition MPs to be ‘shadow ministers’. They form the
shadow cabinet and their role is to challenge the government and put
forward alternative policies.

The party system
Anyone aged 18 or over can stand for election as an MP but they are unlikely
to win unless they have been nominated to represent one of the major
political parties. These are the Conservative Party, the Labour Party, the
Liberal Democrats, or one of the parties representing Scottish, Welsh or
Northern Irish interests.
There are a few MPs who do not represent any of the main political parties.
They are called ‘independents’ and usually represent an issue important to
their constituency.
The main political parties actively look for members of the public to join their
debates, contribute to their costs, and help at elections for Parliament or for
local government. They have branches in most constituencies and hold
policy-making conferences every year.
Pressure and lobby groups are organisations which try to influence
government policy. They play an important role in politics. Some are
representative organisations such as the CBI (Confederation of British
Industry), which represents the views of British business. Others campaign
on particular topics, such as the environment (for example, Greenpeace) or
human rights (for example, Liberty).

The civil service
Civil servants support the government in developing and implementing its
policies. They also deliver public services. Civil servants are accountable to
ministers. They are chosen on merit and are politically neutral – they are not
political appointees. People can apply to join the civil service through an
application process, like other jobs in the UK. Civil servants are expected to
carry out their role with dedication and a commitment to the civil service and
its core values. These are: integrity, honesty, objectivity and impartiality
(including being politically neutral).

Local government
Towns, cities and rural areas in the UK are governed by democratically
elected councils, often called ‘local authorities’. Some areas have both
district and county councils, which have different functions. Most large towns
and cities have a single local authority.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 10
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
Local authorities provide a range of services in their areas. They are funded
by money from central government and by local taxes.
Many local authorities appoint a mayor, who is the ceremonial leader of the
council. In some towns, a mayor is elected to be the effective leader of the
administration. London has 33 local authorities, with the Greater London
Authority and the Mayor of London coordinating policies across the capital.
For most local authorities, local elections for councillors are held in May every
year. Many candidates stand for council election as members of a political
party.

Devolved administrations
Since 1997, some powers have been devolved from the central government
to give people in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland more control over
matters that directly affect them. There has been a Welsh Assembly and a
Scottish Parliament since 1999. There is also a Northern Ireland Assembly,
although this has been suspended on a few occasions.
Policy and laws governing defence, foreign affairs, immigration, taxation and
social security all remain under central UK government control. However,
many other public services, such as education, are controlled by the devolved
administrations.
The devolved administrations each have their own civil service.
The Welsh government
The Welsh government and National Assembly for Wales are based in Cardiff,
the capital city of Wales. The National Assembly has 60 Assembly members
(AMs) and elections are held every four years using a form of proportional
representation. Members can speak in either Welsh or English, and all of the
Assembly’s publications are in both languages.
The Assembly has the power to make laws for Wales in 20 areas, including:
• education and training
• health and social services
• economic development
• housing.
Since 2011, the National Assembly for Wales has been able to pass laws on
these topics without the agreement of the UK Parliament.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 11
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

The Welsh Assembly building opened in March 2006

The Scottish Parliament
The Scottish Parliament was formed in 1999. It sits in Edinburgh, the capital
city of Scotland.
There are 129 members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs), elected by a form
of proportional representation.
The Scottish Parliament can pass laws for
Scotland of all matters which are not specifically reserved to the UK
Parliament. The matters on which the Scottish Parliament can legislate
include:
• Civil and criminal law
• Health
• Education
• Planning
• Additional tax-raising powers.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 12
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

The Scottish Parliament building, opened in October 2004

The Northern Ireland Assembly
A Northern Ireland Parliament was established in 1922, when Ireland was
divided, but it was abolished in 1972, shortly after the Troubles broke out in
1969 (see page 55).
The Northern Ireland Assembly was established soon after the Belfast
Agreement (or Good Friday Agreement) in 1998. There is a power-sharing
agreement which distributes ministerial offices amongst the main parties.
The Assembly has 108 elected members, known as MLAs (members of the
Legislative Assembly).
They are elected with a form of proportional
representation.
The Northern Ireland Assembly can make decisions on issues such as:
• education
• agriculture
• the environment
• health
• social services.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 13
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
The UK government has the power to suspend all devolved assemblies. It
has used this power several times in Northern Ireland when local political
leaders found it difficult to work together. However, the Assembly been
running successfully since 2007.

The Northern Ireland Assembly building, known as Stormont

The media and government
Proceedings in Parliament are broadcast on television and published in official
reports called Hansard. Written reports can be found in large libraries and at
www.parliament.uk. Most people get information about political issues and
events from newspapers (often called ‘the press’), television, radio and the
internet.
The UK has a free press. This means that what is written in newspapers is
free from government control. Some newspaper owners and editors hold
strong political opinions and run campaigns to try to influence government
policy and public opinion.
By law, radio and television coverage of the political parties must be
balanced and so equal time has to be given to rival viewpoints.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 14
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
Check that you understand
• The role of the Prime Minister, cabinet, opposition and shadow cabinet.
• The role of political parties in the UK system of government
• Who the main political parties are
• What pressure and lobby groups do
• The role of the civil service
• The role of local government
• The powers of the devolved governments in Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland
• How proceedings in Parliament are recorded
• The role of the media in keeping people informed about political issues

Who can vote?
The UK has had a fully democratic voting system since 1928. The present
voting age of 18 was set in 1969 and (with a few exceptions) all UK-born and
naturalised adult citizens have the right to vote.
Adult citizens of the UK, and citizens of the Commonwealth and the Irish
Republic who are resident in the UK, can vote in all public elections. Adult
citizens of other EU states who are resident in the UK can vote in all elections
except General Elections.

The electoral register
To be able to vote in a parliamentary, local or European election, you must
have
your
name
on
the
electoral
register.
If you are eligible to vote, you can register by contacting your local council
electoral registration office. This is usually based at your local council (in
Scotland it may be based elsewhere). If you don’t know which local authority
you come under, you can find out by visiting www.aboutmyvote.co.uk and
entering you postcode. You can also download voter registration forms in
English, Welsh and some other languages.
The electoral register is updated every year in September or October. An
electoral registration form is sent to every household and this has to be
completed and returned with the names of everyone who is resident in the
household and eligible to vote.
In Northern Ireland a different system operates. This is called ‘individual
registration’ and all those entitled to vote must complete their own
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 15
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
registration form. Once registered, people stay on the register provided their
personal details do not change. For more information see the Electoral Office
for Northern Ireland website at www.eoni.org.uk
By law, each local authority has to make its electoral register available for
anyone to look at, although this has to be supervised. The register is kept at
each local electoral registration office (or council office in England and
Wales). It is also possible to see the register at some public buildings such
as libraries.

Where to vote
People vote in elections at places called polling stations, or polling places in
Scotland. Before the election you will be sent a poll card. This tells you
where your polling station or polling place is and when the election will take
place. On election day, the polling station or place will be open from 7.00 am
until 10.00 pm.
When you arrive at the polling station, the staff will ask for your name and
address. In Northern Ireland you will also have to show photographic
identification. You will then get your ballot paper, which you take to a polling
booth to fill in privately. You should make up your own mind who to vote for.
No one has the right to make you vote for a particular candidate. You should
follow the instructions on ballot paper. Once you have completed it, put it in
the ballot box.
If it is difficult for you to get to a polling station or polling place, you can
register for a postal ballot. Your ballot paper will be sent to your home
before the election. You then fill it in and post it back. You can choose to do
this when you register to vote.

Standing for office
Most citizens of the UK, the Irish republic or the Commonwealth aged 18 or
over can stand for public office. There are some exceptions, including:
• Members of the armed forces
• Civil servants
• People found guilty of certain criminal offences.
Members of the House of Lords may not stand for election to the House of
Commons but are eligible for all other public offices.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 16
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

Visiting Parliament and the devolved administrations
The UK Parliament
The public can listen to debates in the Palace of Westminster from public
galleries in both the House of Commons and the House of Lords.
You can write to your local MP in advance to ask for tickets or you can Queue
on the day at the public entrance. Entrance is free. Sometimes there are
long queues for the House of Commons and people have to wait for at least
one or two hours. It is usually easier to get in to the House of Lords.
You can find further
www.parliament.uk

information

on

the

UK

Parliament

website

at

Northern Ireland Assembly
In Northern Ireland elected members, known as MLAs, meet in the Northern
Ireland Assembly at Stormont, in Belfast.
There are two ways to arrange a visit to Stormont. You can either contact
the Education Service (details are on the Northern Ireland Assembly website
at www.niassembly.gov.uk) or contact an MLA.
Scottish Parliament
In Scotland the elected members, called MSPs, meet in the Scottish
Parliament building at Holyrood in Edinburgh (for more information, see
www.scottish.parliament.uk).
You can get information, book tickets or arrange tours through visitor
services. You can write to them at the Scottish Parliament, Edinburgh, EH99
1SP, telephone 0131 348 5200, free phone 0800 092 7600 or email
sp.bookings@scottish.parliament.uk
National Assembly for Wales
In Wales the elected members, known as AMs, meet in the Welsh Assembly
in the Senedd in Cardiff Bay (for more information, see www.wales.gov.uk).
The Senedd is an open building. You can book guided tours or seats in the
public galleries for the Welsh Assembly. To make a booking, contact the
Assembly
Booking
Service
on
0845
010
5500
or
email
contact@assembly.wales

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 19
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

The Council of Europe
The Council of Europe is separate from the EU. It has 47 member countries,
including the UK, and is responsible for the protection and promotion of
human rights in those countries. It has no power to make laws but draws up
conventions and charters, the most well-known of which is the European
Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, usually called the
European Convention on Human Rights.

The United Nations
The UK is part of the United Nations (UN), an international organization with
more than 190 countries as members.
The UN was set up after the Second World War and aims to prevent war and
promote international peace and security. There are 15 members on the UN
Security Council, which recommends action when there are international
crises and threats to peace. The UK is one of five permanent members of the
Security Council.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
The UK is also a member of NATO. NATO is a group of European and North
American countries that have agreed to help each other if they come under
attack. It also aims to maintain peace between all of its members.

Check that you understand
• What the Commonwealth is and its role
• Other international organisations of which the UK is a member

Respecting the law
One of the most important responsibilities of all residents in the UK is to
know and obey the law. This section will tell you about the legal system in
the UK and some of the laws that may affect you. Britain is proud of being a
welcoming country, but all residents, regardless of their background, are
expected to comply with the law and to understand that some things which
may be allowed in other legal systems are not acceptable in the UK. Those
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 20
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
who do not respect the law should not expect to be allowed to become
permanent residents of the UK.
The law is relevant to all areas of life in the UK. You should make sure that
you are aware of the laws which affect your everyday life, including both your
personal and business affairs.

The law in the UK
Every person in the UK receives equal treatment under the law. This means
that the law applies in the same way to everyone, no matter who they are or
where they are from.
Laws can be divided into criminal law and civil law:
• Criminal law relates to crimes, which are usually investigated by the police
or another authority such as a council, and which are punished by the courts.
• Civil law is used to settle disputes between individuals or groups.
Examples of criminal laws are:
• Carrying a weapon: it is a criminal offence to carry a weapon of any kind,
even if it is for self-defence. This includes a gun, a knife or anything that is
made or adapted to cause injury.
• Drugs: selling or buying drugs such as heroin, cocaine, ecstasy and
cannabis is illegal in the UK.
• Racial crime: it is a criminal offence to cause harassment, alarm or
distress to someone because of their religion or ethnic origin.
• Selling tobacco: it is illegal to sell tobacco products (for example,
cigarettes, cigars, roll-up tobacco) to anyone under the age of 18.
• Smoking in public places: it is against the law to smoke tobacco products
in nearly every enclosed public place in the UK. There are signs displayed to
tell you where you cannot smoke.
• Buying alcohol: it is a criminal offence to sell alcohol to anyone who is
under 18 or to buy alcohol for people who are under the age of 18. (There is
one exception: people aged 16 or over can drink alcohol with a meal in a
hotel or restaurant – see page 106.)
• Drinking in public: some places have alcohol-free zones where you cannot
drink in public. The police can also confiscate alcohol or move young people
on from public places. You can be fined or arrested.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 21
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
This list does not include all crimes. There are many that apply in most
countries, such as murder, theft and assault. You can find out more about
types of crime in the UK at www.gov.uk
Example of civil laws are:
• Housing law: this includes disputes between landlords and tenants over
issues suck as repairs and eviction.
• Consumer rights: an example of this is a dispute about faulty goods or
services.
• Employment law: these cases include disputes over wages and cases of
unfair dismissal or discrimination in the workplace.
• Debt: people might be taken to court if they owe money to someone.

The police and their duties
The job of the police in the UK is to:
• Protect life and property
• Prevent disturbances (also known as keeping the peace)
• Prevent and detect crime.
The police are organised into a number of separate police forces headed by
Chief Constables. They are independent of the government.
In November 2012, the public elected Police and Crime Commissioners
(PCCs) in England and Wales. These are directly elected individuals who are
responsible for the delivery of an efficient and effective police force that
reflects the needs of their local communities. PCCs set local police priorities
and the local policing budget. They also appoint the local Chief Constable.
The police force is a public service that helps and protects everyone, no
matter what their background or where they live. Police officers must
themselves obey the law. They must not misuse their authority, make a
false statement, be rude or abusive, or commit racial discrimination. If police
officers corrupt or misuse their authority they are severely punished.
Police officers are supported by the police community support officers
(PCSOs). PCSOs have different roles according to the area but usually patrol
the streets, work with the public, and support police officers at crime scenes
and major events.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 22
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
All people in the UK are expected to help the police prevent and detect
crimes whenever they can. If you are arrested and taken to a police station,
a police officer will tell you the reason for your arrest and you will be able to
seek legal advice.

The police in the UK protect life and property, prevent disturbances and detect crime

If something goes wrong, the police complaints system tries to put it right.
Anyone can make a complaint about the police by going to a police station
and writing to the Chief Constable of the police force involved. Complaints
can also be made to an independent body: the Independent Police
Complaints Commission in England and Wales, the Police Complaints
Commissioner for Scotland or the Police Ombudsman for Northern Ireland.

Terrorism and extremism
The UK faces a range of terrorist threats. The most serious of these is from
Al Qa’ida, its affiliates and like-minded organisations. The UK also faces
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 23
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
threats from other kind of terrorism, such as Northern Ireland-related
terrorism.
All terrorist groups try to radicalise and recruit people to their cause. How,
where and to what extent they try to do so will vary. Evidence shows that
these groups attract very low levels of public support, but people who want
to make their home in the UK should be aware of this threat. It is important
that all citizens feel safe. This includes feeling safe from all kinds of
extremism (vocal or active opposition to fundamental British values),
including religious extremism and far-right extremism.
If you think someone is trying to persuade you to join an extremist or
terrorist cause, you should notify your local police force.

Check that you understand
• The difference between civil and criminal law and some examples of each
• The duties of the police
• The possible terrorist threats facing the UK

The role of the courts
The judiciary
Judges (who are together called ‘the judiciary’) are responsible for
interpreting the law and ensuring that trials are conducted fairly. The
government cannot interfere with this.
Sometimes the actions of the government are claimed to be illegal. If the
judges agree, then the government must either change its policies or ask
Parliament to change the law. If judges find that a public body is not
respecting someone’s legal rights, they can order that body to change its
practices and/or pay compensation.
Judges also make decisions in disputes between members of the public or
organisations. These might be about contracts, property or employment
rights or after an accident.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 24
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

Criminal courts
There are some differences between the court systems in England and Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Magistrates’ and Justice of the Peace Courts
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, most minor criminal cases are dealt
with in a Magistrates’ Court. In Scotland, minor criminal offences go to a
Justice of the Peace Court.
Magistrates and Justices of the Peace (JPs) are members of the local
community. In England, Wales and Scotland they usually work unpaid and
do not need legal qualifications. They receive training to do the job and are
supported by a legal adviser. Magistrates decide the verdict in each case
that comes before them and, if the person is found guilty, the sentence that
they are given. In Northern Ireland, cases are heard by a District Judge or
Deputy District Judge, who is legally qualified and paid.
Crown Courts and Sheriff Courts
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, serious offences are tried in front of
a judge and a jury in a Crown Court. In Scotland, serious cases are heard in
a Sheriff Court with either a sheriff or a sheriff with a jury. The most serious
cases in Scotland, such as murder, are heard at a High Court with a judge
and jury. A jury is made up of members of the public chosen at random from
the local electoral register (see page 134). In England, Wales and Northern
Ireland a jury has 12 members, and in Scotland a jury has 15 members.
Everyone who is summoned to do jury service must do it unless they are not
eligible (for example, because they have a criminal conviction) or they
provide a good reason to be excused, such as ill health.
The jury has to listen to the evidence presented at the trial and then decide a
verdict of ‘guilty’ or ‘not guilty’ based of what they have heard. In Scotland,
a third verdict of ‘not proven’ is also possible. If the jury finds a defendant
guilty, the judge decides the penalty.
Youth Courts
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, if an accused person is aged 10 to
17, the case is normally heard in a Youth Court in front of up to three
specially trained magistrates or a District Judge. The most serious cases will
go to the Crown Court. The parents or carers of the young person are
expected to attend the hearing. Members of the public are not allowed in
Youth Courts, and the name or photographs of the accused young person
cannot be published in newspapers or used by the media.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 25
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
In Scotland a system called the Children’s Hearings System is used to deal
with children and young people who have committed an offence.
Northern Ireland has a system of youth conferencing to consider how a child
should be dealt with when they have committed an offence.

The Old Bailey is probably the most famous criminal court in the world

Civil courts
County Courts
County Courts deal with a wide range of civil disputes. These include people
trying to get back money that is owed to them, cases involving personal
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 26
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
injury, family matters, breaches of contract, and divorce. In Scotland, most
of these matters are dealt with in the Sheriff Court. More serious civil cases
– for example, when a large amount of compensation is being claimed – are
dealt with in the High Court of England, Wales and Northern Ireland. In
Scotland, they are dealt with in the Court of Session in Edinburgh.
The small claims procedure
The small claims procedure is an informal way of helping people to settle
minor disputes without spending a lot of time and money using a lawyer.
This procedure is used for claims of less than £5,000 in England and Wales
and £3,000 in Scotland and Northern Ireland. The hearing is held in front of
a judge in an ordinary room, and people from both sides of the dispute sit
around a table. Small claims can also be issued online through Money Claims
Online (www.moneyclaim.gov.uk).
You can get details about the small claims procedure from your local County
Court or Sheriff Court. Details of your local court can be found as follows:
• England and Wales: at www.gov.uk
• Scotland: at www.scotcourts.gov.uk
• Northern Ireland: at www.courtsni.gov.uk

Legal advice
Solicitors
Solicitors are trained lawyers who give advice on legal matters, take action
for their clients and represent their clients in court.
There are solicitors’ offices throughout the UK. It is important to find out
which aspects of law a solicitor specialises in and to check that they have the
right experience to help you with your case.
Many advertise in local
newspapers and in Yellow Pages.
The Citizens Advice Bureau
(www.citizensadvice.org.uk) can give you names of local solicitors and which
areas of law they specialise in. You can also get this information from the
Law Society (www.lawsociety.org.uk) in England and Wales, the Law Society
of Scotland (www.lawscot.org.uk) or the Law Society of Northern Ireland
(www.lawsoc-ni.org). Solicitors’ charges are usually based on how much
time they spend of a case. It is very important to find out at the start how
much a case is likely to cost.

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 27
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

Check that you understand
• The role of the judiciary
• About the different criminal courts in the UK
• About the different civil courts in the UK
• How you can settle a small claim

Fundamental principles
Britain has a long history of respecting an individual’s rights and ensuring
essential freedoms. These rights have their roots in Magna Carta, the
Habeas Corpus Act and the Bill of Rights of 1689, and they have developed
over a period of time. British diplomats and lawyers had an important role in
drafting the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms. The UK was one of the first countries to sign the Convention in
1950.
Some of the principles included in the European Convention of Human Rights
are:
• right to life
• prohibition of torture
• prohibition of slavery and forced labour
• right to liberty and security
• right to a fair trial
• freedom of thought, conscience and religion
• freedom of expression (speech).
The Human Rights Act 1998 incorporated the European Convention of Human
Rights into UK law. The government, public bodies and the courts must
follow the principles of the Convention.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 28
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

Equal opportunities
UK laws ensure that people are not treated unfairly in any area of life or work
because of their age, disability, sex, pregnancy and maternity, race, religion
or belief, sexuality or marital status.
If you face problems with
discrimination, you can get more information from the Citizens Advice Bureau
or from one of the following organisations:
• England and Wales: Equality and Human Rights Commission
(www.equalityhumanrights.com)
• Scotland: Equality and Human Rights Commission in Scotland
(www.equalityhumanrights.com/scotland/the-commission-in-scotland) and
Scottish Human Rights Commission (www.scottishhumanrights.com)
• Northern Ireland: equality Commission for Northern Ireland
(www.equalityni.org)
• Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission (www.nihrc.org).

Domestic violence
In the UK, brutality and violence in the home is a serious crime. Anyone who
is violent towards their partner – whether they are a man or a woman,
married or living together – can be prosecuted. Any man who forces a
woman to have sex, including a woman’s husband, can be charged with rape.
It is important for anyone facing domestic violence to get help as soon as
possible. A solicitor or the Citizens Advice Bureau can explain the available
options. In some areas there are safe places to go and stay in, called
refuges or shelters. There are emergency telephone numbers in the helpline
section at the front of Yellow Pages, including, for women, the number of the
nearest women’s centre. You can also phone the 24-hour National Domestic
Violence Freephone Helpline on 0808 2000 247 at any time, or the police can
help you find a safe place to stay.

Female genital mutilation
Female genital mutilation (FGM), also known as cutting or female
circumcision, is illegal in the UK. Practicing FGM or taking a girl or woman
abroad for FGM is a criminal offence.

Forced marriage
A marriage should be entered into with the full and free consent of both
people involved. Arranged marriages, where both parties agree to the
marriage, are acceptable in the UK.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 29
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
Forced marriage is where one or both parties do not or cannot give their
consent to enter into the partnership. Forcing another person to marry is a
criminal offence.
Forced Marriage Protection Orders were introduced in 2008 for England,
Wales and Northern Ireland under the Forced Marriage (Civil Protection) Act
2007. Court orders can be obtained to protect a person from being forced
into a marriage, or to protect a person in a forced marriage. Similar
Protection Orders were introduced in Scotland in November 2011.
A potential victim, or someone acting for them, can apply for an order.
Anyone found to have breached an order can be jailed for up to two years for
contempt of court.

Taxation
Income tax
People in the UK have to pay tax on their income, which includes:
• Wages from paid employment
• Profits from self-employment
• Taxable benefits
• Pensions
• Income from property, savings and dividends.
Money raised from income tax pays for government services such as roads,
education, police and the armed forces.
For most people, the right amount of income tax is automatically taken from
their income from employment by their employer and paid directly to HM
Revenue & Customs (HMRC), the government department that collects taxes.
This system is called “Pay As You Earn” (PAYE). If you are self-employed,
you need to pay your own tax through a system called ‘self-assessment’,
which includes completing a tax return. Other people may also need to
complete a tax return. If HMRC sends you a tax return, it is important to
complete and return the form as soon as you have all the necessary
information.
You can find out more about income tax at www.hmrc.gov.uk/incometax.
You can get help and advice about taxes and completing tax forms from the
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 30
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
HMRC self-assessment helpline, on 0845 300 0627, and the HMRC website at
www.hmrc.gov.uk

National Insurance
Almost everybody in the UK who is in paid work, including self-employed
people, must pay National Insurance Contributions. The money raised from
National Insurance Contributions is used to pay for state benefits and
services such as the state retirement pension and the National Health Service
(NHS).
Employees have their National Insurance Contributions deducted from their
pay by their employer. People who are self-employed need to pay National
Insurance Contributions themselves.
Anyone who does not pay enough National Insurance Contributions will not
be able to receive certain contributory benefits such as Jobseeker’s Allowance
or a full state retirement pension. Some workers, such as part-time workers,
may not qualify for statutory payments such as maternity pay if they do not
earn enough.
Further guidance about National Insurance Contributions is available on
HMRC’s website at www.hmrc.gov.uk/ni
Getting a National Insurance number
A National Insurance number is a unique personal account number. It makes
sure that the National Insurance Contributions and tax you pay are properly
recorded against your name. All young people in the UK are sent a National
Insurance number just before their 16th birthday.
A non-UK national living in the UK and looking for work, starting work or
setting up as self-employed will need a National Insurance number.
However, you can start work without one. If you have permission to work in
the UK, you will need to telephone the Department for Work and Pensions
(DWP) to arrange to get a National Insurance number. You may be required
to attend an interview.
The DWP will advise you of the appropriate
application process and tell you which documents you will need to bring to an
interview if one is necessary. You will usually need documents that prove
your identity and that you have permission to work in the UK.
A National Insurance number does not on its own prove to an employer that
you have the right to work in the UK.
You can find out more information about how to apply for a National
Insurance number at www.gov.uk

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 31
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

Driving
In the UK, you must be at least 17 years to drive a car or motor cycle and
you must have a driving licence to drive on public roads. To get a UK driving
licence you must pass a driving test, which tests both your knowledge and
your practical skills. You need to be at least 16 years old to ride a moped,
and there are other age requirements and special tests for driving large
vehicles.
Drivers can use their driving licence until they are 70 years old. After that,
the licence is valid for three years at a time.
In Northern Ireland, a newly qualified driver must display an ‘R’ plate (for
restricted driver) for one year after passing the test.
If your driving licence if from a country in the
Liechtenstein or Norway, you can drive in the
is valid. If you have a licence from any other
UK for up to 12 months. To continue driving
full driving licence.

European Union (EU), Iceland,
UK for as long as your licence
country, you may use it in the
after that, you must get a UK

If you are resident in the UK, your car or motor cycle must be registered at
the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA). You must pay an annual
road tax and display the tax disc, which shows that the tax has been paid, on
the windowscreen. You must also have valid motor insurance. It is a serious
criminal offence to drive without insurance. If your vehicle is over three
years old, you must take it to the Ministry of Transport (MOT) test every
year. It is an offense not to have a MOT certificate if your vehicle is more
than three years old. You can find out more about vehicle tax and MOT
requirements from www.gov.uk

Check that you understand
• The fundamental principle of UK law
• That domestic violence, FGM and forced marriage are illegal in the UK
• The system of income tax and National Insurance
• The requirements for driving a car

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 32
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

Your role in the community
Becoming a British citizen or settling in the UK brings responsibilities but also
opportunities.
Everyone has the opportunity to participate in their
community. This section looks at some of the responsibilities of being a
citizen and gives information about how you can help to make your
community a better place to live and work.

Values and responsibilities
Although Britain is one of the world’s most diverse societies, there is a set of
shared values and responsibilities that everyone can agree with. These
values and responsibilities include:
• To obey and respect the law
• To be aware of the rights of others and respect those rights
• To treat others with fairness
• To behave responsibly
• To help and protect your family
• To respect and preserve the environment
• To treat everyone equally, regardless of sex, race, religion, age, disability,
class or sexual orientation
• To work to provide for yourself and your family
• To help others
• To vote in local and national government elections.
Taking on these values and responsibilities will make it easier for you to
become a full and active citizen.

Being a good neighbour
When you move into a new house or apartment, introduce yourself to the
people who live near you. Getting to know your neighbours can help you to
become part of the community and make friends. Your neighbours are also a
good source of help – for example, they may be willing to feed your pets if
you are away, or offer advice on local shops and services.
You can help prevent any problems and conflicts with your neighbours by
respecting their privacy and limiting how much noise you make. Also try to
keep your garden tidy, and only put your refuse bags and bins on the street
or in communal areas if they are due to be collected.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 33
UKCitizenshipsupport.com

Getting involved in local activities
Volunteering and helping your community are an important part of being a
good citizen. They enable you to integrate and get to know other people. It
helps to make your community a better place if residents support each other.
It also helps you to fulfil your duties as a citizen, such as behaving
responsibly and helping others.

How you can support your community
There are a number of positive ways in which you can support your
community and be a good citizen.

Jury service
As well as getting the right to vote, people on the electoral register are
randomly selected to serve on a jury. Anyone who is on the electoral
register and is aged 18 to 70 can be asked to do this.

Helping in schools

Parents often help in classrooms, by supporting activities or listening to children read

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 34
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
If you have children, there are many ways in which you can help at their
schools. Parents can often help in classrooms, by supporting activities or
listening to children read.
Many schools organise events to raise money for extra equipment or out-ofschool activities. Activities might include book sales, toy sales or bringing
food to sell. You might have good ideas of your own for raising money.
Sometimes events are organised by parent-teacher associations (PTAs).
Volunteering to help with their events or joining the association is a way of
doing something good for the school and also making new friends in your
local community. You can find out about these opportunities from notices in
the school or notes your children bring home.
School governors and school boards
School governors, or members of the school board in Scotland, are people
from the local community who wish to make a positive contribution to their
children’s education. They must be aged 18 or over at the date of their
election or appointment. There is no upper age limit.
Governors and school boards have an important part to play in raising school
standards. They have three key roles:
• Setting the strategic direction of the school
• Ensuring accountability
• Monitoring and evaluating school performance.
You can contact your local school to ask if they need a new governor or
school board member. In England, you can also apply online at the School
Governors’ One-Stop Shop at www.sgoss.org.uk
In England, parents and other community groups can apply to open a free
school in their local area. More information about this can be found on the
Department for Education website at www.dfe.gov.uk

Supporting political parties
Political parties welcome new members. Joining one is a way to demonstrate
your support for certain views and to get involved in the democratic process.
Political parties are particularly busy at election times. Members work hard
to persuade people to vote for their candidates – for instance, by handing out
leaflets in the street or by knocking on people’s doors and asking for their
support. This is called ‘canvassing’. You don’t have to tell a canvasser how
you intend to vote if you don’t want to.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 35
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
British citizens can stand for office as a local councillor, a member of
Parliament (or the devolved equivalents) or a member of the European
Parliament. This is an opportunity to become even more involved in the
political life of the UK. You may also be able to stand for office if you are an
Irish citizen, an eligible Commonwealth citizen or (except for standing to be
an MP) a citizen of another EU country.
You can find out more about joining a political party from the individual party
websites.

Helping with local services
There are opportunities to volunteer with a wide range of local service
providers, including local hospitals and youth projects. Services often want
to involve local people in decisions about the way in which they work.
Universities, housing associations, museums and arts councils may advertise
for people to serve as volunteers in their governing bodies.
You can volunteer with the police, and become a special constable or a lay
(non-police) representative. You can also apply to become a magistrate.
You will often find advertisements for vacancies in your local newspaper or
on local radio. You can also find out more about these sorts of roles at
www.gov.uk

Blood and organ donation
Donated blood is used by hospitals to help people with a wide range of
injuries and illnesses. Giving blood only takes about an hour to do. You can
register to give blood at:
• England and North Wales: www.blood.co.uk
• Rest of Wales: www.welsh-blood.org.uk
• Scotland: www.scotblood.co.uk
• Northern Ireland: www.nibts.org
Many people in the UK are waiting for organ transplants. If you register to
be an organ donor, it can make it easier for your family to decide whether to
donate your organs when you die. You can register to be an organ donor at
www.organdonation.nhs.uk. Living people can also donate a kidney.

Other ways to volunteer
Volunteering is working for good causes without payment. There are many
benefits to volunteering, such as meeting new people and helping make your
community a better place. Some volunteer activities will give you a chance
to practise your English or develop work skills that will help you find or
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 36
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
improve your curriculum vitae (CV). Many people volunteer simply because
they want to help other people.
Activities you can do as a volunteer include:
• working with animals – for example, caring for animals at a local rescue
shelter
• youth work – for example, volunteering at a youth group
• helping improve the environment – for example, participating in a litter
pick-up in the local area
• working with the homeless in, for example, a homelessness shelter
• mentoring – for example, supporting someone who has just come out of
prison
• work in health and hospitals – for example, working on an information
desk in a hospital
• helping older people at, for example, a residential care home.

Voluntary organisations work to improve the lives of people, animals and the environment in
many different ways

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 37
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
There are thousands of active charities and voluntary organizations in the
UK. They work to improve the lives of people, animals and the environment
in many different ways. They range from the British Red Cross, to small local
charities working in particular areas. They include charities working with
older people (such as Age UK), with children (for example, the National
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC)), and with the
homeless (for example, Crisis and Shelter). There are also medical research
charities (for example, Cancer Research UK), environmental charities
(including the National Trust and Friends of the Earth) and charities working
with animals (such as the People’s Dispensary for Sick Animals (PDSA)).
Volunteers are needed to help with their activities and to raise money. The
charities often advertise in local newspapers, and most have websites that
include information about their opportunities. You can also get information
about volunteering for different organisations from www.do-it.org.uk
There are many opportunities for younger people to volunteer and receive
accreditation which will help them to develop their skills. These include the
National Citizen Service programme, which gives 16- and 17-year-olds the
opportunity to enjoy outdoor activities, develop their skills and take part in a
community project. You can find out more about these opportunities as
follows:
• National Citizen Service: at nationalcitizenservice.direct.gov.uk
• England: at www.vinspired.com
• Wales: at www.gwirvol.org
• Scotland: at www.vds.org.uk
• Northern Ireland: at www.volunteernow.co.uk

Looking after the environment
It is important to recycle as much of your waste as you can. Using recycled
materials to make new products uses less energy and means that we do not
need to extract more raw materials from the earth. It also means that less
rubbish is created, so the amount being put into landfill is reduced.
You can learn more about recycling and it benefits at www.recyclenow.com.
At this website you can also find out what you can recycle at home and in the
local area you live in England. This information is available for Wales at
www.wasteawarenesswales.org.uk,
for
Scotland
at
www.recycleforscotland.com and for Northern Ireland from your local
authority.
This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

Chapter 5: The UK Government, the Law and Your Role - Page 38
UKCitizenshipsupport.com
A good way to support your local community is to shop for products locally
where you can. This will help businesses and farmers in your area in Britain.
It will also reduce your carbon footprint, because the products you buy will
not have had to travel as far.
Walking and using public transport to get around when you can is also a good
way to protect the environment. It means that you create less pollution than
when you use a car.

Check that you understand
• The different ways you can help at your child’s school
• The role of school governors and members of school boards, and how you
can become one
• The role of members of political parties
• The different local services people can volunteer to support
• How to donate blood and organs
• The benefit of volunteering for you, other people and the community
• The types of activities that volunteers can do
• How you can look after the environment

This material is based on the "Life in the United Kingdom: A Guide for New Residents – 3rd Edition"
handbook and reproduced with the permission of Controller of HMSO under Open Parliament Licence. ©
Crown copyright. This reproduction is provided solely for the convenience of our users and is for studying
purposes. This reproduction is for your sole use only. You may not distribute, republish, display, post or
transmit this reproduction.

